\n\n--- page 1 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
MOMAGRAPH
 : STATE-AWAREUNIFIEDSCENE
GRAPHS WITHVISION–LANGUAGEMODEL FOREM-
BODIEDTASKPLANNING
Yuanchen Ju∗1, Yongyuan Liang∗2, Yen-Jen Wang∗1, Nandiraju Gireesh, Yuanliang Ju3
Seungjae Lee2, Qiao Gu3, Elvis Hsieh1, Furong Huang†2, Koushil Sreenath†1
1University of California, Berkeley 2University of Maryland, College Park
3University of Toronto
Project website: https://HybridRobotics.github.io/MomaGraph/
Figure 1: Overview of theMomaGraph. Given a task instruction,MomaGraphconstructs a task-
specific scene graph that highlights relevant objects and parts along with their spatial-functional
relationships, enabling the robot to perform spatial understanding and task planning.
ABSTRACT
Mobile manipulators in households must both navigate and manipulate. This
requires a compact, semantically rich scene representation that captureswhere
objects are,howthey function, andwhich partsare actionable. Scene graphs
are a natural choice, yet prior work often separates spatial and functional re-
lations, treats scenes as static snapshots without object states or temporal up-
dates, and overlooks information most relevant for accomplishing the cur-
rent task. To address these limitations, we introduceMomaGraph, a uni-
fied scene representation for embodied agents that integrates spatial-functional
relationships and part-level interactive elements. However, advancing such
a representation requires both suitable data and rigorous evaluation, which
have been largely missing. We thus contributeMomaGraph-Scenes, the
first large-scale dataset of richly annotated, task-driven scene graphs in house-
hold environments, along withMomaGraph-Bench, a systematic evalua-
tion suite spanning six reasoning capabilities from high-level planning to fine-
grained scene understanding. Built upon this foundation, we further develop
MomaGraph-R1, a 7B vision–language model trained with reinforcement learn-
ing onMomaGraph-Scenes.MomaGraph-R1predicts task-oriented scene
graphs and serves as a zero-shot task planner under aGraph-then-Planframework.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art results
among open-source models, reaching71.6%accuracy on the benchmark (+11.4%
over the best baseline), while generalizing across public benchmarks and transfer-
ring effectively to real-robot experiments.
∗ Equal Contribution, † Equal Advising
1
arXiv:2512.16909v2  [cs.CV]  9 Feb 2026\n\n--- page 2 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1 INTRODUCTION
When mobile manipulators (Qiu et al., 2024; Honerkamp et al., 2024a; Wu et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2024a) enter household environments, they face the fundamental challenge of understanding how the
environment works, which objects are interactive, and how they can be used. In other words, such
robots must not only be capable of navigating through the home, but also manipulate objects within
it. While navigation requires modeling the overall spatial layout, manipulation demands capturing
more fine-grained object affordances (Ju et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025). This naturally raises a central
question:What is the most effective, compact, and semantically rich representation of an indoor
scene?An intuitive answer is thescene graph, which organizes objects and their relationships in
a scene through a graph structure (Armeni et al., 2019; Koch et al., 2024a;b) and has shown great
potential in various downstream robotic applications (Rana et al., 2023; Werby et al., 2024; Ekpo
et al., 2024).
However, existing scene graphs suffer from notable limitations. (1) Their edges typically encode
only a single type of relationship, either spatial (Jatavallabhula et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024a; Loo
et al., 2025; Hughes et al., 2024; Rosinol et al., 2021) or functional (Zhang et al., 2025; Dong
et al., 2021)(e.g., a remote controlling a TV , a knob adjusting parameters). Relying solely on spatial
relationships captures geometric layout but overlooks operability, while relying solely on functional
relationships ignores spatial constraints, leading to incomplete and less actionable structures. (2)
Most existing methods (Wu et al., 2021; Takmaz et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2021) are limited to
static scenes and struggle to adapt to dynamic environments where object positions change or object
states change. (3) They lack task relevance, as they fail to emphasize information directly tied to
task execution, thereby reducing efficiency and effectiveness. In contrast, cognitive science research
(Uithol et al., 2021; Kondyli et al., 2020; Castanheira et al., 2025) shows that human perception
in new environments is both dynamic and task-oriented. Humans do not process all information
equally; instead, they flexibly adjust their attention according to the current task. This process is
similar to browsing a map on an iPad: people first take a broad view to roughly locate the area of
interest, and then zoom in to focus on the specific details needed for the task.
Motivated by these insights, we emphasize thatan ideal scene graph should integrate both spatial
and functional relationships, include fine-grained object parts as nodes, making the represen-
tation compact, adaptive to dynamic changes, and highly aligned with task instructions, thus
providing a more concrete guidance for embodied perception and task planning.
To achieve this goal, we presentMomaGraph, a novel scene representation specifically designed for
embodied agents. It is the first to unify spatial and functional relationships while introducing part-
level interactive nodes, providing a more fine-grained, compact, and task-relevant structured repre-
sentation than existing approaches. To support this representation, we buildMomaGraph-Scenes,
the first dataset that jointly models spatial and functional relationships with part-level annotations,
encompassing multi-view observations, executed actions, and their interactive object parts, and task-
aligned scene graph annotations.
Building on this foundation, we proposeMomaGraph-R1, a 7B vision–language model
(VLM) trained with the DAPO (Yu et al., 2025) reinforcement learning algorithm on
MomaGraph-Scenes. We design a graph-alignment reward function to guide the model toward
constructing accurate, task-oriented scene graphs.MomaGraph-R1not only predicts scene graphs
but also serves as a zero-shot task planner within aGraph-then-Planframework: the model first
generates a structured scene graph as an intermediate representation and then performs task plan-
ning based on this graph, significantly improving reasoning effectiveness and interpretability.
Despite progress in task-graph planning (Agia et al., 2022), the community still lacks a unified
benchmark to systematically evaluate whether and how task-oriented scene graphs improve plan-
ning performance. To address this gap, we introduceMomaGraph-Bench, a comprehensive eval-
uation suite that systematically assesses six key reasoning capabilities, spanning from high-level
task planning to fine-grained scene understanding.
In summary, our work makes the following key contributions:
• We proposeMomaGraph, the first scene graph representation that jointly models spatial and
functional relationships while incorporating part-level interactive nodes, providing a compact,
dynamic, and task-aligned knowledge structure for embodied intelligence.
2\n\n--- page 3 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
• We constructMomaGraph-Scenes, the first large-scale dataset of richly annotated, task-driven
scene graphs in household environments, and buildMomaGraph-Bench, a unified evaluation
suite that systematically measures the impact of scene graph representations on task planning
across six core reasoning capabilities.
• We developMomaGraph-R1, a 7B vision-language model that leverages reinforcement learn-
ing to optimize spatial–functional reasoning, enabling zero-shot planning in aGraph-then-Plan
paradigm.
•MomaGraph-R1surpasses all open-source baseline models, delivering substantial gains across
public benchmarks and translating these improvements into strong generalization and effective-
ness in real-world robotic experiments.
2 RELATED WORKS
Scene Graphs for 3D Indoor Scene Understanding.Scene graphs have emerged as a structured
and hierarchical representation in autonomous driving (Zhang et al., 2024b; Greve et al., 2024),
robot manipulation (Jiang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Engelbracht et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2025;
Maggio et al., 2024), and spatial intelligence (Yin et al., 2025; Zemskova & Yudin; Liang et al.,
2025a;b) community. They function not only as a means of scene representation but also as a criti-
cal bridge between spatial understanding (Cao et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024b)and
action planning. We focus on the household scenes. However, existing works often focus on a sin-
gle type of scene graphs. For example, ConceptGraphs (Gu et al., 2024a) primarily model spatial
layouts, representing object instances and their geometric relations in an open-vocabulary manner.
While spatial graphs (Honerkamp et al., 2024b; Yan et al., 2025) provide useful geometric and se-
mantic grounding, they overlook how objects can functionally interact with one another. Conversely,
functional graphs (Li et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2025) highlight object affordances
and control relations but do not capture the overall spatial structure. Relying solely on either spatial
or functional graphs leads to incomplete and less actionable representations. This motivates us to
buildMomaGraph, which unifies spatial and functional relationships, incorporates part-level nodes,
and explicitly models state changes, providing a more comprehensive foundation for embodied task
planning.
Zero-shot Embodied Task Planning with VLMs.VLMs (OpenAI, 2023; Team et al., 2025; Ahn
et al., 2022) have gained significant attention in robotic task planning (Niu et al., 2024; Yue et al.,
2024; Lu et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024) due to their powerful capabilities in
processing multimodal inputs, such as images and language instructions. However, when directly
used as task planners, VLMs (Huang et al., 2023; 2024; Ahn et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2025a; Yang
et al., 2025) often suffer from sensitivity to visual noise and shallow semantic grounding; more
fundamentally, their lack of structured object–relationship representations necessitates extracting or
constructing more effective representations from the same visual inputs to support accurate and re-
liable high-level planning. Prior approaches such as SayPlan (Ahn et al., 2022) assume access to a
reliable 3D scene graph, which is often unrealistic in practice. To overcome this gap, we propose
theGraph-then-Planstrategy, which first generates task-specific scene graphs as an intermediate
structured representation before high-level planning. By explicitly modeling objects and their re-
lations, this approach significantly improves the accuracy and robustness of task planning. Unlike
prior graph-then-plan methods (Dai et al., 2024; Ekpo et al., 2024) that either assume reliable scene
graphs or treat graph construction and planning as separate modules, our approach enables a single
VLM to jointly generate structured, task-oriented scene graphs and perform high-level planning.
3 PRELIMINARYFINDINGS ANDMOTIVATIONEXPERIMENTS
To ground our analysis, before the full evaluations we perform two motivating experiments on the
MomaGraph-Bench. These comparisons are designed to validate our motivation and design prin-
ciples, and to reveal why our proposed model is essential for embodied task planning. In this section,
we aim to answer the following questions.
3.1 AREVLMSRELIABLE FORDIRECTPLANNINGWITHOUTSCENEGRAPHS?
To examine whether direct planning from visual inputs is reliable even for strong closed-source
VLMs, we design controlled evaluations on real-world household tasks such as“Open the window”
3\n\n--- page 4 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 2: Direct planning often fails even for strong closed-source models like GPT-5, producing
wrong actions or missing key steps, while ourGraph-then-Planapproach with structured scene
graphs enables accurate and complete task sequences aligned with ground truth.
and“Obtain clean boiled water”. In these scenarios, models must reason over functional relation-
ships, spatial constraints, and multi-step dependencies (e.g., plug-in before activation, filtration be-
fore boiling). As shown in Fig. 2, despite their scale, closed-source VLMs like GPT-5 produce incor-
rect or incomplete plans, missing prerequisite steps, or misidentifying interaction types. In contrast,
ourGraph-then-Planapproach, which first generates a task-specific scene graph and then performs
planning, consistently produces correct and complete action sequences aligned with ground-truth
logic. This demonstrates that incorporating structured scene representations significantly enhances
planning accuracy and robustness beyond what direct planning can achieve.
Preliminary Findings 1
•In contrast to directly relying on vision-language models for task planning from raw scene
images, ourGraph-then-Planstrategy—which incorporates task-oriented scene graph
generation as an intermediate structured representation prior to high-level planning, sub-
stantially improves both the accuracy and robustness of task planning.
3.2 ARESINGLE-RELATIONSHIPGRAPHSADEQUATE FOREMBODIEDAGENTS?
To ensure a fair comparison, we retrain our model using the same graph structure as inMomaGraph,
but constrain the edge types to encode only a single kind of relation—either spatial or functional.
This setup allows us to isolate the effect of relation types while keeping the graph topology consis-
tent, thereby directly examining whether single-relation representations are sufficient for task plan-
ning. To ensure this finding generalizes beyond one specific architecture, we evaluate this compari-
son across different base models using the same dataset and experimental configurations. As demon-
strated in Table 1, bothMomaGraph-R1(trained from Qwen-2.5-VL-7B) and LLaV A-Onevision
consistently show superior performance with unified spatial-functional scene graphs compared to
single-relationship variants, supporting our hypothesis that integrated representations are essential
for effective embodied task planning. Detailed training methodology is described in the Sec. 4.2.
Table 1: Comparison betweenMomaGraph-R1and LLaV A variants across task tiers.
Models T1 T2 T3 T4 Overall Models T1 T2 T3 T4 Overall
MomaGraph-R1 (Spatial-only) 69.1 67.0 58.4 45.4 59.9
LLaV A-Onevision (Spatial-only) 63.4 56.7 59.7 36.3 54.0
MomaGraph-R1 (Functional-only) 71.4 65.8 63.6 59.0 64.9
LLaV A-Onevision (Functional-only) 65.1 61.7 55.8 45.4 57.0
MomaGraph-R1 (Unified)76.4 71.9 70.1 68.1 71.6
LLaV A-Onevision (Unified)68.6 62.9 67.5 56.5 66.0
4\n\n--- page 5 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Preliminary Findings 2
•Graph representations that rely solely on spatial relationships or solely on functional re-
lationships are insufficient. For embodied agents,a unified representation that jointly
models both spatial and functional relationshipsprovides a more complete and effective
foundation for perception and action.
4 METHOD
4.1 MOMAGRAPHDEFINITION
Given a single indoor room, the agent receives as input a set ofmulti-view images{Ii}n
i=1 and a nat-
ural language instructionT. The objective is to construct aninstruction-conditioned,task-oriented
scene graphG T = (NT ,E T
s ,E T
f ). Here,N T denotes the set of nodes representing objects relevant
to taskT.E T
s encodes thespatial relationshipsamong these nodes, andE T
f captures theirfunctional
relationships. This task-oriented scene graph provides a minimal yet sufficient structured represen-
tation that grounds the instructionTin the observed scene and facilitates downstream embodied
task planning. BothE T
s andE T
f are modeled as directed edges, pointing from thetriggering object
to theaffected object.
4.2 VLMSLEARNSCENEGRAPHREPRESENTATIONS WITHREINFORCEMENTLEARNING
Existing open-source VLMs have demonstrated limited capability in generating accurate task-
oriented scene graphsG T from multi-view observations{I i}n
i=1 and natural language instructions
T. VLMs do not form structured spatial-functional representations or reason effectively about task-
relevant object relationships needed for embodied tasks. To go further, we want to know:Can
reinforcement learning teach VLMs to build more precise and task-relevant scene graph repre-
sentations withMomaGraph?
Reinforcement learning offers a more principled approach by encouraging the model to explore,
reason, and iteratively refine its representations through outcome-driven feedback. Rather than
replicating memorized patterns, RL enables models to discover effective strategies for construct-
ing task-relevant scene graphs through structured thinking and reasoning. We apply the DAPO (Yu
et al., 2025). The key innovation lies in our carefully designedgraph-based reward function
R(Gpred
T ,G gt
T ), whereG pred
T andG gt
T denote the predicted and ground truth task-oriented scene graphs,
respectively, which evaluates how well predicted graphs embody these principles through three key
components.
Action type prediction.Given the task instructionT, we ensure correct prediction of the required
action type throughR action =I[a pred =a gt], wherea pred anda gt denote the predicted and ground
truth action types, respectively.
Spatial-functional integration on edges.We jointly evaluate both spatial relationshipsE T
s and
functional relationshipsE T
f within each edge, whereE T
pred andE T
gt represent the predicted and ground
truth edge sets:
Redges = 1
|E T
gt |
X
ej ∈E T
gt
max
ei∈E T
pred
Sedge(ei, ej)(1)
whereS edge(ei, ej)measures semantic similarity between edgese i ande j based on their spatial and
functional relationship labels.
Node completeness.We compute intersection-over-union similarity for task-relevant objects inNT ,
whereN pred
T andN gt
T denote the predicted and ground truth sets of task-relevant nodes:R nodes =
|N pred
T ∩N gt
T |
|N pred
T ∪N gt
T |.
The final reward function integrates these task-oriented design principles with format validation
and length control, whereR format ensures valid JSON structure andR length penalizes overly verbose
outputs:
R(Gpred
T ,G gt
T ) =wa ·(R action +R edges +R nodes) +wf ·R format +w l ·R length (2)
5\n\n--- page 6 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
wherew a,w f , andw l are hyperparameters controlling the relative importance of each component.
This reward design directly implements our core insight: scene graphs must simultaneously capture
spatial layout (E T
s ) and functional relationships (E T
f ) while remaining tightly coupled to task re-
quirements (T). With RL training onMomaGraph-Scenes, we developMomaGraph-R1, a 7B
vision-language model built on Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct (Qwen, 2025), which learns to generate
compact, task-relevant representations that provide concrete guidance for embodied planning.
We demonstrate that RL significantly enhances both the effectiveness and generalizability of open-
source VLMs for scene graph generation in the following section. This aligns with broader findings
that combining structured scene representations with reasoning consistently improves VLM scene
understanding. Critically,MomaGraph-R1achieves robust performance across diverse environ-
ments and task configurations, enabling practical deployment in unseen embodied scenarios.
4.3 STATE-AWAREDYNAMICSCENEGRAPHUPDATE
In realistic environments, multiple objects of the same category may coexist, and their task-related
correspondences are often initiallyuncertain. Take Figure 3 as an example, a kitchen stove may
have several knobs, but only one controls the burner required for the current cooking task. Simply
relying on visual appearance is insufficient to determine the correct functional relationship. In this
work, we do not focus on the agent’s interaction policy; instead, our emphasis lies onhow to capture
and incorporate observed state changes in the environmentinto the scene graph to resolve such
ambiguities.
1234
2314
KnobsStoves
Updated Graph
Updated GraphInitial Graph
Uncertainty of Edges
Final Graph
W/oUncertainty
State-AwareDynamic Upadate
State Changes
Knob1
Keep Interacting
Figure 3:MomaGraphcaptures state changes
in the environment and dynamically updates the
task-specific scene graph accordingly, enabling
the graph to evolve as interactions occur and re-
flecting updated spatial–functional relationships.
Formally, at time stept, the task-oriented scene
graph is represented as:
G(t)
T =
 
N (t)
T ,E T,(t)
s ,E T,(t)
f

,(3)
whereN (t)
T denotes the set of task-relevant
candidate objects,E T,(t)
s encodes their spatial
layout, andE T,(t)
f captureshypothesizedfunc-
tional relationships, which may initially include
one-to-many mappings.
After the agent executes an actiona t and ob-
serves the new environment states t+1, the
scene graph is refined as:
G(t+1)
T =U

G(t)
T , at, st+1

,(4)
where the update functionU(·)removes incon-
sistent hypotheses and strengthens confirmed correspondences based on the observed state transi-
tion. As illustrated in Fig. 3, if rotating a specific knob ignites the burner while others have no
effect, the functional edge[control]between that knob and the burner is established, while
edges from other knobs are pruned. This process enables the scene graph to evolve from ambigu-
ous, one-to-many hypotheses into a compact,state-aware dynamic representationwith unique and
reliable object-to-object correspondences.
5 DATASET ANDBENCHMARK
5.1 MOMAGRAPH-SCENESDATASET
Existing scene graph datasets for 3D indoor environments are often constrained to a single rela-
tionship: some focus exclusively onspatial layoutsof objects (Armeni et al., 2019; Koch et al.,
2024b), while others emphasizefunctional interactions(Dong et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2025).
However, these scene graph representations that are restricted to a single relationship type are in-
sufficient for embodied agents, as task execution in household environments requires reasoning
about bothwhere objects areandhow they can be used. To address these limitations, we in-
troduceMomaGraph-Scenes, the first dataset designed to provide a more comprehensive and
task-relevant scene representation.MomaGraph-Scenesjointly encodesspatial relationships
andfunctional relationships, covering9 spatial relationship types and 6 functional relationship
6\n\n--- page 7 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
types, explicitly representing interactive elements such as handles and buttons. Our dataset con-
sists of approximately 1,050 task-oriented subgraphs and 6278 multi-view RGB images, collected
from a combination of manually collected real-world data, re-annotated existing datasets (Zhang
et al., 2025; Delitzas et al., 2024), and simulated environments built with AI2-THOR (Kolve et al.,
2017). These samples span more than350 diverse household scenesand encompass93 distinct
task instructions. Compared with prior datasets, our annotations are significantly more detailed,
and capturing interaction semantics at both the object and part levels. This broad coverage en-
sures rich variability in scene layouts, object configurations, and interaction types, supporting robust
learning and evaluation of embodied reasoning.
5.1.1 DATASETANNOTATION
Multi-View Observation.The multi-view images provided for each graph are not constrained to
always contain every relevant object within each single view. We also do not impose restrictions on
the number of viewpoints or their exact configurations. This flexible setup better reflects realistic
perception conditions, where embodied agents must reason across partial and diverse observations
to build consistent scene graph representations.
Task Instruction.It is worth noting that the task instructions in our dataset do not explicitly mention
all the objects required to accomplish the task. Instead, they are expressed in simple and natural
forms (e.g., “Fill the bathtub”), where the relevant objects such as thebathtub,faucet, andbutton
must be inferred by the model. This design encourages the model to learn how to ground natural
instructions into the appropriate set of objects and relationships, rather than relying on object names
being explicitly stated.
Nodes.N T primarily consists of the objects necessary to accomplish the instruction. When the
task execution requires interacting with specific parts, the graph may additionally includepart-level
interactive elements(e.g., handles, knobs, or buttons). For example, for the instruction “Open the
fridge,”N T includes both thefridgeand itshandle; for the instruction “Turn on the light,”N T
consists of theswitchand theceiling light.
Edges.Edges in the task-oriented scene graph capture bothfunctionalandspatialrelationships
between nodes.
•Functional Relationships.We define a functional relationship as the ability of one object to
change the state of another object. In indoor environments, common tasks can be broadly cate-
gorized asParameter Adjustment, Device Control, Open/Close the Cabinet or Door, Water Flow
Control, Power Supply, and Assembly. Accordingly, we identify six major types:
[OPEN OR CLOSE], [ADJUST], [CONTROL], [ACTIV ATE], [POWER BY], [PAIR WITH].
Notably, [PAIR WITH] does not alter the internal state of objects but instead modifies their spatial
configuration, which is essential for assembly tasks (Qi et al., 2025). Since such tasks are criti-
cal for robotic interaction and task planning, we explicitly include [PAIR WITH] as a functional
relationship. Through this definition, our dataset extends beyond physical and electronic interac-
tions to encompass fine-grained reasoning about assembly and pairing, enhancing its utility for
downstream action execution and planning.
•Spatial Relationships.Capture geometric dependencies between objects and parts. The dataset
primarily annotates:
Directional:[LEFT OF], [RIGHT OF], [IN FRONT OF], [BEHIND], [HIGHER THAN],
[LOWER THAN].
Distance-based:[CLOSE], [FAR], [TOUCHING].
These annotations provide the rich context necessary for reasoning about layout, reachability, and
interaction feasibility.
5.2 MOMAGRAPHBENCHMARK ANDEVALUATION
We introduceMomaGraph-Bench, the first benchmark that jointly evaluates fine-grained scene
understanding and task planning abilities across diverse levels of difficulty. Our design principle
forMomaGraph-Benchis to evaluate whether advances in scene understanding provide tangible
improvements in downstream task planning and reasoning. Our evaluation framework examines six
essential reasoning capabilities in four tiers of difficulty levels: (1)Action Sequence Reasoning, (2)
7\n\n--- page 8 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Action Reasoning
Spatial ReasoningAffordance Reasoning
Object SelectionEffect Prediction
Dynamic Verification
Long-horizon task decomposition
VisualCorrespondance
What is the correct action to complete the task 'Open the window.'?A) Push the windowB) Pull the windowC) Rotate the handleD) Press the handleCorrect Answer: B
What is the correct sequence to obtain cleanboiled water?A) Plug in kettle →Switch kettle ON →Fill faucet water directlyB) Fill the filter jug with faucet water →Pour filtered water into kettle →Plug kettle into outlet →Switch kettle ONC) Switch faucet ON →Switch kettle ON →Plug kettle into outletD) Plug kettle into outlet onlyCorrect Answer: B
Which point is corresponding to the reference point?A) Point A       B) Point B       C) Point C       D) Point DCorrect Answer: D
What is the spatial relationship between the button / knob and the bathroom sink?A) Higher thanB) right ofC) Far fromD) Lower thanCorrect Answer: D
What is the primary functional relationship between the knob and the radiator?A) Power by     B) AdjustC) Open            D) CloseCorrect Answer: B
To complete 'Power on the dryer', which object should you interact with first?A)TowelB) Electric outletC) Power buttonD) CordCorrect Answer: B
After successfully inserting the plug into the electric outlet, what will happen?A) The humidifier will be powered on  B) The drawer will open  C) The cabinet will openD) The book will be movedCorrect Answer: A
Between Scene 1 and Scene 3 only one switch was toggled. Which lamp does that switch control?A) The ceiling panel lightB) The round wall sconceC) Both lampsD) Neither lampCorrect Answer: A
Figure 4: Examples of evaluation Multi-Choices VQA tasks in theMomaGraph-Bench. We show-
case example questions covering six core reasoning capabilities. Beyond these core capabilities, we
further design tasks onDynamic VerificationandLong-horizon Task Decompositionto evaluate tem-
poral reasoning and multi-steps planning.
Spatial Reasoning, (3)Object Affordance Reasoning, (4)Precondition & Effect Reasoning, (5)Goal
Decomposition, and (6)Visual Correspondence(with concrete examples shown in Fig. 4).
•Action Sequence Reasoning: examines whether models understand the order and dependency of
actions and can plan efficient sequences.
•Spatial Reasoning: focuses on reasoning over spatial relations such asleft oforin front of,
judging reachability, and selecting the most suitable object among candidates.
•Object Affordance Reasoning: evaluates whether models can infer the functionality of objects
(e.g., knobs can be turned, cabinets can be opened), match objects to task requirements, and
reason about indirect tool use.
•Precondition & Effect Reasoning: assesses whether models understand the preconditions and
effects of actions, such as a door needing to be closed before it can be opened, and can predict
possible side effects.
•Goal Decomposition: measures the ability to break down complex tasks into sub-goals, prioritize
them, and determine parallel versus sequential execution strategies.
•Visual Correspondence (extended capability): tests whether models can maintain object con-
sistency across multiple views and integrate information under viewpoint changes.
MomaGraph-Benchis formulated as a multi-choice VQA task which comprises 294 diverse in-
door scenes with 1,446 multi-view images, featuring 352 task-oriented scene graphs spanning 1,315
instances that range from simple step object manipulation(Tier 1) to complex multi-step replanning
(Tier 4) scenarios (detailed breakdown in Appendix A.4).MomaGraph-Benchoffers the most
comprehensive assessment for embodied agents’ capacity to generalize across tasks and scenarios.
To ensure that the evaluation truly reflects generalization rather than memorization, all scenarios are
drawn from entirely unseen environments.
6 EXPERIMENTS
6.1 BENCHMARKEVALUATION FOREMBODIEDTASKPLANNING
We compare the performance of ourMomaGraph-R1with other models across all task tiers in
MomaGraph-Benchto rigorously assess embodied planning, including state-of-the-art closed
8\n\n--- page 9 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 2: Performance comparison on theMomaGraph-Bench. We report accuracy (%) across
four tiers (T1–T4) and the overall score, with and without graph-based reasoning.
Type Models Params MomaGraph Benchmark
Tier 1 Tier 2 Tier 3 Tier 4Overall
w/o Graphw/ Graphw/o Graphw/ Graphw/o Graphw/ Graphw/o Graphw/ Graphw/o Graphw/ Graph
ClosedSource
Claude-4.5-Sonnet - 77.3 83.7 67.0 70.3 69.7 72.3 65.2 69.5 69.8 73.9
GPT-5 - 77.3 79.8 63.4 68.2 70.8 75.0 54.5 63.6 66.5 71.6
Gemini-2.5-Pro - 76.6 79.0 65.8 69.5 67.5 72.7 60.8 65.2 67.6 71.6
OpenSource
InstructBLIP-7B 7B 43.1 44.1 42.6 41.4 38.6 36.3 31.8 36.3 39.0 39.5
LLaV A-V1.5-7B 7B 51.0 53.4 46.3 48.7 40.2 36.3 38.9 40.9 44.1 44.8
DeepSeek-VL2 4.5B 54.2 56.9 51.2 53.6 61.8 61.3 40.9 45.4 52.0 54.3
InternVL2.5-8B 8B 53.6 51.0 51.2 53.0 55.8 59.7 33.3 40.9 48.4 51.1
LLaV A-Onevision-7B 7B60.0 63.8 52.4 56.0 58.4 59.2 43.4 43.4 53.5 55.6
Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct 7B62.1 66.3 58.5 58.5 51.9 57.1 56.5 59.0 57.2 60.2
MomaGraph-R1(Ours)7B70.2 76.4 65.8 71.9 63.6 70.1 60.8 68.1 65.1 71.6
Table 3: Performance comparison on the BLINK andMomaGraph-Bench. By enforcing multi-
view consistency, our method significantly improves correspondence reasoning across all open-
source models.
Model
 GPT-5
 LLaV A-Onevision
Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct
DeepSeek-VL2
 MomaGraph-R1
BLINK MomaGraph-Bench BLINK MomaGraph-Bench BLINK MomaGraph-Bench BLINK MomaGraph-Bench BLINK MomaGraph-Bench
Results66.1 81.2 59.7 70.7 58.7 72.7 57.4 68.4 63.5 77.5
source models (Claude-4.5-Sonnet, GPT-5, Gemini-2.5-Pro) and leading open source models (In-
structBLIP, LLaV A-V1.5, DeepSeek-VL2, InternVL2.5, LLaV A-OneVision, Qwen2.5). We further
examine whetherGraph-then-Planbrings performance gains by evaluating each model under two
controlled settings: (i)Direct Plan (w/o Graph): the model is directly evaluated on task planning
inMomaGraph-Benchusing multi-view observations and instructions; (ii)Graph-then-Plan (w/
Graph): the model first generates a task-oriented scene graphG T , capturing nodes, spatial and func-
tional edges, and action types, and then performs task planning conditioned on the graph.
6.1.1 RESULTANALYSIS.
The results in Table 2 yield several key insights:
(1) Effectiveness of Graph-then-Plan.Across all models, thew/ Graphsetting consistently outper-
forms thew/o Graphbaseline, demonstrating that explicitly structuring task-oriented scene graphs
provides a tangible benefit for downstream planning. This validates our central hypothesis that dis-
entangling scene representation from action generation improves reasoning reliability.
(2) Competitiveness ofMomaGraph-R1.OurMomaGraph-R1achieves performance on par with
closed-source giants like Claude-4.5-Sonnet and GPT-5, while clearly surpassing all leading open-
source VLMs. Notably,MomaGraph-R1delivers a+11.4%relative improvement over its base
model (Qwen2.5-VL-7B) underw/ Graph, highlighting the effectiveness of reinforcement learning
with graph-based rewards.
(3) Scalability with Task Complexity.As task complexity increases from Tier 1 to Tier 4, the per-
formance of most open-source baselines drops sharply, reflecting their limited ability to generalize
to multi-step reasoning. In contrast,MomaGraph-R1exhibits a much smaller degradation, pre-
serving strong performance in Tier 3 and Tier 4. This indicates superior scalability to long-horizon
planning scenarios, a crucial capability for embodied agents.
(4) General Trend Across Communities.Closed-source models still maintain the highest absolute
performance, benefiting from larger-scale pretraining and proprietary data. However, the consis-
tent gap reduction achieved byMomaGraph-R1shows that reinforcement learning with graph-
structured intermediate representations can substantially narrow the divide, offering a practical path
toward competitive open-source systems.
6.2 BENCHMARKEVALUATION FORVISUALCORRESPONDENCE
As the model learns scene representations from multi-view observations, it exhibits an emergent
ability ofcross-view consistency, which can reason about the same point across different viewpoints.
9\n\n--- page 10 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Open the Cabinet
Open the Microwave
Turnonthe TV
Turn off the Light
Figure 5: Real Robot experiments on the RobotEra Q5 with a D455, demonstrating four household
tasks that require spatial, functional, and part-level interactive elements reasoning for task execution.
This capability is most evident in visual correspondence tasks. As shown in Table 3, we compare
model performance on visual correspondence tasks from public benchmark BLINK Fu et al. (2024)
and ourMomaGraph-Bench. Scene graph representations enhance performance universally by
reducing VLM hallucinations in visual perception. By prompting models to first generate structured
scene graphs (w/ Graph) and then answer questions in single-turn interactions, we force them to ex-
plicitly reason about spatial and functional relationships between objects before answering. We pri-
marily evaluate perception on multi-view reasoning and visual correspondence tasks from BLINK,
as well as multi-view correspondence inMomaGraph-Bench. OurMomaGraph-R1achieves
state-of-the-art performance among open-source VLMs, leading by 3.8% on BLINK and 4.8% on
our correspondence benchmark compared to the best competing open-source models. These results
confirm thatMomaGraph-R1enables more nuanced and detailed perception of complex indoor
scenes, effectively mitigating hallucinations and enabling more reliable scene perception.
6.3 REALROBOTDEMONSTRATIONS
Setup.To validate the effectiveness of our model in real-world settings, we deploy on the RobotEra
Q5, a bimanual humanoid platform with a mobile base. An Intel RealSense D455 camera is mounted
to enhance RGB-D perception. Importantly, all evaluation scenes areunseen, ensuring that perfor-
mance reflects true generalization.
Tasks.We design four representative tasks (Figure 5), consisting of twolocalinteractions (e.g.,
opening a cabinet, opening a microwave) and tworemoteinteractions (e.g., turning on the TV ,
turning off a light).
Deployment.Prior to execution, the robot performs active perception by adjusting its head pose
to acquire multi-view observations.MomaGraph-R1processes these observations together with
the task instruction to generate a task-specific subgraph, which explicitly encodes the relevant ob-
jects and their spatial–functional relationships, see more deployment details in B.3. Following the
Graph-then-Planparadigm,MomaGraph-R1then functions as a task planner, producing a struc-
tured action sequence. These specifications are subsequently instantiated as low-level trajectories
through a library of parameterized primitive skills. We note that the primitive skills are task-specific
and derived from teleoperation data for each scenario; the primary contribution of this work lies in
the high-level planning and scene graph generating enabled byMomaGraph-R1.
Summary.Our real-world evaluations show thatMomaGraph-R1delivers robust scene under-
standing and task planning even in unseen scenarios, while remaining directly compatible with stan-
dard mobile humanoid systems. This combination underscores the strength of our model and its
practicality for real-world deployment.
10\n\n--- page 11 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
6.4 QUANTITATIVEREAL-ROBOTEVALUATION
To provide rigorous quantitative validation of our system’s robustness, we conduct a comprehen-
sive evaluation on a complex multi-step long-horizon task. This evaluation includes success rates
and failure analysis across different stages to validate overall system performance under realistic,
sequential conditions (see Figure 6).
Figure 6:Quantitative real-robot evaluation.(a) Environment setup of the real-robot experiment.
(b) Failure analysis illustrating success/failure rates across different reasoning stages.
Task Setup.We evaluate the following natural language instruction that requires sequential rea-
soning and manipulation:“I need better lighting. Turn on the light closest to the remote so I can find
it and turn on the monitor to watch. ”To assess system robustness, we conducted 10 experimental
trials, changing the camera viewpoint in each trial.
This task requires spatial reasoning (finding the switch and the remote), functional understanding
(linking switches, lights, remote, monitor), and state-dependent planning (lighting affects percep-
tion). Additionally, there’s object uncertainty (multiple similar lamps or switches), complex spatial
relations between objects, and sequential manipulation under partial observability.
Results.As shown in Figure 6, our system achieves an 80% success rate in graph generation, 87.5%
success rate in planning (conditioned on correct graphs), and an overall task success rate of 70%
over 10 trials.
The main failure modes were: (1)spatial relation errors or missing nodes during graph generation;
and (2) action sequencing errors in the planning phase, suggesting that the system sometimes plans
the right actions but in a suboptimal order.
These results demonstrate thatMomaGraphremains robust across multiple reasoning and execution
stages, achieving a 70% overall success rate on a complex multi-step task. This validates the sys-
tem’s reliability under realistic long-horizon conditions where errors can compound across stages.
7 CONCLUSION
This work addresses to the fundamental limitations of existing scene graphs for embodied agents:
reliance on a single type of relationship, inability to adapt to dynamic environments, and lack of
task relevance. To overcome these issues, we introduceMomaGraph, a novel scene representation
that unifies spatial and functional scene graphs with interactive elements. To learn this represen-
tation, we construct a large-scale datasetMomaGraph-Scenesand proposeMomaGraph-R1,
a 7B VLM trained with reinforcement learning, which predicts task-oriented scene graphs and
serves as a zero-shot task planner under aGraph-then-Planframework. Furthermore, we design
theMomaGraph-Bench, a comprehensive benchmark that rigorously evaluates both fine-grained
reasoning and high-level planning. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our ap-
proach achieves state-of-the-art performance among open source models, remains competitive with
closed source systems, and transfers effectively to public benchmarks and real robot experiments.
We hope thatMomaGraphwill serve as a foundation for advancing scene representations, fostering
stronger connections between the spatial VLM and robotics communities, and ultimately enabling
more intelligent and adaptive embodied agents.
11\n\n--- page 12 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
8 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to express our heartfelt thanks to Chenyangguang Zhang, Prof. Florian Shkurti, and
Prof. Tom Silver for their insightful suggestions and constructive feedback. We also thank Guowei
Zhang, Yuman Gao, Bike Zhang, Gechen Qu, Lihan Zha, Yuanhang Zhang, and Yu Qi for their
valuable assistance in the collection of benchmark data. We thank Robot Era for providing their Q5
Mobile Manipulator for our experiments.
Liang, Lee and Huang are supported by DARPA Transfer from Imprecise and Abstract Models
to Autonomous Technologies (TIAMAT) 80321, DARPA HR001124S0029-AIQ-FP-019, DOD-
AFOSR-Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-23-1-0048, National
Science Foundation NSF-IIS-2147276 FAI, National Science Foundation NAIRR240045, National
Science Foundation TRAILS Institute (2229885). Private support was provided by Peraton and
Open Philanthropy.
The work by Ju, Wang, and Sreenath was supported by The Robotics and AI Institute.
REFERENCES
Christopher Agia, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Mohamed Khodeir, Ondrej Miksik, Vibhav Vi-
neet, Mustafa Mukadam, Liam Paull, and Florian Shkurti. Taskography: Evaluating robot task
planning over large 3d scene graphs. InConference on Robot Learning, pp. 46–58. PMLR, 2022.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
Grounding language in robotic affordances.arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Iro Armeni, Zhi-Yang He, JunYoung Gwak, Amir R Zamir, Martin Fischer, Jitendra Malik, and
Silvio Savarese. 3d scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3d space, and camera. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 5664–5673, 2019.
Yang Cao, Yuanliang Jv, and Dan Xu. 3dgs-det: Empower 3d gaussian splatting with boundary
guidance and box-focused sampling for 3d object detection.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01647,
2024.
Jason da Silva Castanheira, Nicholas Shea, and Stephen M Fleming. How attention simplifies mental
representations for planning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09520, 2025.
Zhirui Dai, Arash Asgharivaskasi, Thai Duong, Shusen Lin, Maria-Elizabeth Tzes, George Pappas,
and Nikolay Atanasov. Optimal scene graph planning with large language model guidance. In
2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 14062–14069.
IEEE, 2024.
Alexandros Delitzas, Ayca Takmaz, Federico Tombari, Robert Sumner, Marc Pollefeys, and Fran-
cis Engelmann. SceneFun3D: Fine-Grained Functionality and Affordance Understanding in 3D
Scenes. InIEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Ang Dong, Li Feng, Dengcheng Yang, Shuang Wu, Jinshuai Zhao, Jing Wang, and Rongling Wu.
Fungraph: A statistical protocol to reconstruct omnigenic multilayer interactome networks for
complex traits.Star Protocols, 2(4):100985, 2021.
Daniel Ekpo, Mara Levy, Saksham Suri, Chuong Huynh, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Verigraph:
Scene graphs for execution verifiable robot planning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10446, 2024.
Tim Engelbracht, Ren ´e Zurbr ¨ugg, Marc Pollefeys, Hermann Blum, and Zuria Bauer. Spot-
light: Robotic scene understanding through interaction and affordance detection.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.11870, 2024.
Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan Roth, Noah A
Smith, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. Blink: Multimodal large language models can see but
not perceive. InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 148–166. Springer, 2024.
12\n\n--- page 13 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Elias Greve, Martin B¨uchner, Niclas V¨odisch, Wolfram Burgard, and Abhinav Valada. Collaborative
dynamic 3d scene graphs for automated driving. In2024 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11118–11124. IEEE, 2024.
Qiao Gu, Ali Kuwajerwala, Sacha Morin, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Bipasha Sen, Aditya
Agarwal, Corban Rivera, William Paul, Kirsty Ellis, Rama Chellappa, et al. Conceptgraphs:
Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for perception and planning. In2024 IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5021–5028. IEEE, 2024a.
Qiao Gu, Zhaoyang Lv, Duncan Frost, Simon Green, Julian Straub, and Chris Sweeney. Egolifter:
Open-world 3d segmentation for egocentric perception. InEuropean Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 382–400, 2024b.
Yanjiang Guo, Yen-Jen Wang, Lihan Zha, and Jianyu Chen. Doremi: Grounding language model
by detecting and recovering from plan-execution misalignment. In2024 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 12124–12131. IEEE, 2024.
Daniel Honerkamp, Martin B ¨uchner, Fabien Despinoy, Tim Welschehold, and Abhinav Valada.
Language-grounded dynamic scene graphs for interactive object search with mobile manipula-
tion.IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024a.
Daniel Honerkamp, Martin B ¨uchner, Fabien Despinoy, Tim Welschehold, and Abhinav Valada.
Language-grounded dynamic scene graphs for interactive object search with mobile manipula-
tion.IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024b.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. V oxposer:
Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Yunzhu Li, Ruohan Zhang, and Li Fei-Fei. Rekep: Spatio-
temporal reasoning of relational keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.01652, 2024.
Nathan Hughes, Yun Chang, Siyi Hu, Rajat Talak, Rumaia Abdulhai, Jared Strader, and Luca Car-
lone. Foundations of spatial perception for robotics: Hierarchical representations and real-time
systems.The International Journal of Robotics Research, 43(10):1457–1505, 2024.
Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Alihusein Kuwajerwala, Qiao Gu, Mohd. Omama, Ganesh Iyer,
Soroush Saryazdi, Tao Chen, Alaa Maalouf, Shuang Li, Nikhil Varma Keetha, Ayush Tewari,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Celso Miguel de Melo, K. Madhava Krishna, Liam Paull, Florian Shkurti,
and Antonio Torralba. Conceptfusion: Open-set multimodal 3d mapping. InRobotics: Science
and Systems, 2023.
Guangqi Jiang, Yifei Sun, Tao Huang, Huanyu Li, Yongyuan Liang, and Huazhe Xu. Robots pre-
train robots: Manipulation-centric robotic representation from large-scale robot datasets. 2025.
Hanxiao Jiang, Binghao Huang, Ruihai Wu, Zhuoran Li, Shubham Garg, Hooshang Nayyeri, Shen-
long Wang, and Yunzhu Li. Roboexp: Action-conditioned scene graph via interactive exploration
for robotic manipulation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15487, 2024.
Yuanchen Ju, Kaizhe Hu, Guowei Zhang, Gu Zhang, Mingrun Jiang, and Huazhe Xu. Robo-abc:
Affordance generalization beyond categories via semantic correspondence for robot manipulation.
InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2024.
Sebastian Koch, Pedro Hermosilla, Narunas Vaskevicius, Mirco Colosi, and Timo Ropinski.
Lang3dsg: Language-based contrastive pre-training for 3d scene graph prediction. In2024 Inter-
national Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 1037–1047. IEEE, 2024a.
Sebastian Koch, Narunas Vaskevicius, Mirco Colosi, Pedro Hermosilla, and Timo Ropinski.
Open3dsg: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs from point clouds with queryable objects and open-
set relationships. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 14183–14193, 2024b.
13\n\n--- page 14 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt
Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, et al. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment
for visual ai.arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
Vasiliki Kondyli, Mehul Bhatt, and Jakob Suchan. Towards a human-centred cognitive model of
visuospatial complexity in everyday driving.arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00059, 2020.
Qi Li, Kaichun Mo, Yanchao Yang, Hang Zhao, and Leonidas Guibas. Ifr-explore: Learning inter-
object functional relationships in 3d indoor scenes.arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05298, 2021.
Yongyuan Liang, Tingqiang Xu, Kaizhe Hu, Guangqi Jiang, Furong Huang, and Huazhe Xu. Make-
an-agent: A generalizable policy network generator with behavior-prompted diffusion. 2024.
Yongyuan Liang, Wei Chow, Feng Li, Ziqiao Ma, Xiyao Wang, Jiageng Mao, Jiuhai Chen, Jiatao
Gu, Yue Wang, and Furong Huang. Rover: Benchmarking reciprocal cross-modal reasoning for
omnimodal generation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01163, 2025a.
Yongyuan Liang, Xiyao Wang, Yuanchen Ju, Jianwei Yang, and Furong Huang. Lemon: A
unified and scalable 3d multimodal model for universal spatial understanding.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.12822, 2025b.
Joel Loo, Zhanxin Wu, and David Hsu. Open scene graphs for open-world object-goal navigation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04678, 2025.
Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chunyuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-
Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of
foundation models in visual contexts.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02255, 2023.
Dominic Maggio, Yun Chang, Nathan Hughes, Matthew Trang, Dan Griffith, Carlyn Dougherty,
Eric Cristofalo, Lukas Schmid, and Luca Carlone. Clio: Real-time task-driven open-set 3d scene
graphs.IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
Dantong Niu, Yuvan Sharma, Giscard Biamby, Jerome Quenum, Yutong Bai, Baifeng Shi, Trevor
Darrell, and Roei Herzig. Llarva: Vision-action instruction tuning enhances robot learning.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.11815, 2024.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. Technical report, OpenAI, 2023. URLhttps://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532815.
Yu Qi, Yuanchen Ju, Tianming Wei, Chi Chu, Lawson LS Wong, and Huazhe Xu. Two by two:
Learning multi-task pairwise objects assembly for generalizable robot manipulation.CVPR 2025,
2025.
Ri-Zhao Qiu, Yafei Hu, Yuchen Song, Ge Yang, Yang Fu, Jianglong Ye, Jiteng Mu, Ruihan Yang,
Nikolay Atanasov, Sebastian Scherer, et al. Learning generalizable feature fields for mobile ma-
nipulation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07563, 2024.
Qwen. Qwen2.5-vl, January 2025. URLhttps://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen2.
5-vl/.
Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf.
Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task plan-
ning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06135, 2023.
Antoni Rosinol, Andrew Violette, Marcus Abate, Nathan Hughes, Yun Chang, Jingnan Shi, Arjun
Gupta, and Luca Carlone. Kimera: From slam to spatial perception with 3d dynamic scene graphs.
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 40(12-14):1510–1546, 2021.
Ayca Takmaz, Alexandros Delitzas, Robert W Sumner, Francis Engelmann, Johanna Wald, and
Federico Tombari. Search3d: Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d segmentation.IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 2025.
14\n\n--- page 15 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Gemini Robotics Team, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montser-
rat Gonzalez Arenas, Travis Armstrong, Ashwin Balakrishna, Robert Baruch, Maria Bauza,
Michiel Blokzijl, et al. Gemini robotics: Bringing ai into the physical world.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.20020, 2025.
Sebo Uithol, Katherine L Bryant, Ivan Toni, and Rogier B Mars. The anticipatory and task-driven
nature of visual perception.Cerebral Cortex, 31(12):5354–5362, 2021.
Yixuan Wang, Leonor Fermoselle, Tarik Kelestemur, Jiuguang Wang, and Yunzhu Li. Curious-
bot: Interactive mobile exploration via actionable 3d relational object graph.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.13338, 2025.
Abdelrhman Werby, Chenguang Huang, Martin B ¨uchner, Abhinav Valada, and Wolfram Burgard.
Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for language-grounded robot navigation. InFirst
Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024, 2024.
Jimmy Wu, Rika Antonova, Adam Kan, Marion Lepert, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Jeannette Bohg,
Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with
large language models.Autonomous Robots, 47(8):1087–1102, 2023.
Shun-Cheng Wu, Johanna Wald, Keisuke Tateno, Nassir Navab, and Federico Tombari. Scene-
graphfusion: Incremental 3d scene graph prediction from rgb-d sequences. InProceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7515–7525, 2021.
Zhijie Yan, Shufei Li, Zuoxu Wang, Lixiu Wu, Han Wang, Jun Zhu, Lijiang Chen, and Jihong Liu.
Dynamic open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for long-term language-guided mobile manipulation.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
Jianwei Yang, Reuben Tan, Qianhui Wu, Ruijie Zheng, Baolin Peng, Yongyuan Liang, Yu Gu,
Mu Cai, Seonghyeon Ye, Joel Jang, et al. Magma: A foundation model for multimodal ai agents.
InProceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 14203–14214,
2025.
Timing Yang, Yuanliang Ju, and Li Yi. Imov3d: Learning open vocabulary point clouds 3d object
detection from only 2d images.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:141261–
141291, 2024.
Baiqiao Yin, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Jianshu Zhang, Kangrui Wang, Zihan Wang, Jieyu
Zhang, Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran, Han Liu, Ranjay Krishna, et al. Spatial mental modeling
from limited views.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21458, 2025.
Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian
Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system
at scale.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens,
Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multi-
modal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9556–9567, 2024.
Tatiana Zemskova and Dmitry Yudin. 3dgraphllm: Combining semantic graphs and large language
models for 3d referred object grounding.
Chenyangguang Zhang, Alexandros Delitzas, Fangjinhua Wang, Ruida Zhang, Xiangyang Ji, Marc
Pollefeys, and Francis Engelmann. Open-vocabulary functional 3d scene graphs for real-world
indoor spaces. InProceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp.
19401–19413, 2025.
Shoulong Zhang, Aimin Hao, Hong Qin, et al. Knowledge-inspired 3d scene graph prediction in
point cloud.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18620–18632, 2021.
Yuanhang Zhang, Tianhai Liang, Zhenyang Chen, Yanjie Ze, and Huazhe Xu. Catch it! learning to
catch in flight with mobile dexterous hands.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10319, 2024a.
15\n\n--- page 16 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Yunpeng Zhang, Deheng Qian, Ding Li, Yifeng Pan, Yong Chen, Zhenbao Liang, Zhiyao Zhang,
Shurui Zhang, Hongxu Li, Maolei Fu, et al. Graphad: Interaction scene graph for end-to-end
autonomous driving.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19098, 2024b.
Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Hal Daum ´e III, Andrey Kolobov,
Furong Huang, and Jianwei Yang. Tracevla: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal
awareness for generalist robotic policies. 2025a.
Yaowei Zheng, Junting Lu, Shenzhi Wang, Zhangchi Feng, Dongdong Kuang, and Yuwen Xiong.
Easyr1: An efficient, scalable, multi-modality rl training framework.https://github.com/
hiyouga/EasyR1, 2025b.
Junzhe Zhu, Yuanchen Ju, Junyi Zhang, Muhan Wang, Zhecheng Yuan, Kaizhe Hu, and Huazhe
Xu. Densematcher: Learning 3d semantic correspondence for category-level manipulation from
a single demo.International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) Spotlight, 2025.
16\n\n--- page 17 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
A APPENDIX
A.1 MOMAGRAPH-SCENESDATASET
A.1.1 REAL-WORLDDATASETSOURCE ANDCOLLECTION.
Our dataset is built through a synergistic integration of newly curated data and existing public re-
sources. We manually collected a substantial portion of the data in real-world household envi-
ronments, capturing diverse interaction scenarios under natural conditions. To further enrich the
dataset, we incorporated samples from two public benchmarks, OpenFunGraph (Zhang et al., 2025)
and SceneFun3D (Delitzas et al., 2024), both of which contain videos depicting human–object in-
teractions in indoor contexts. From these videos, we carefully curated representative keyframes to
derive multi-view RGB observations, ensuring comprehensive coverage of interaction dynamics and
spatial variability.
A.1.2 SIMULATIONDATACOLLECTION
To complement the real-world data, we additionally generated samples within the AI2-THOR sim-
ulation environment Kolve et al. (2017). We strategically positioned the embodied agent at diverse,
reachable viewpoints and captured multi-view observations from varying perspectives, as illustrated
in Fig. 7. Throughout this process, we applied manual post-filtering to exclude non-interactable
elements, thereby ensuring that the curated dataset remains focused on actionable objects and em-
phasizes functional relevance critical for downstream embodied reasoning tasks.
Figure 7: Simulated indoor environments in our benchmark. Each row shows three scenes (Floor
15,Floor 224andFloor 301) with a top-down view of the layout, reachable locations for the robot,
and multiview observations from different viewpoints.
A.1.3 DATASETANNOTATION ANDFORMAT.
Annotation and Format.Each task-oriented subgraph inMomaGraph-Scenesis stored in a
structured JSON format and linked to its corresponding scene. Annotations include a subgraph iden-
tifier, the associated scene identifier, the action type, the functional category, the natural language
task instruction, a set of nodes, and a set of edges. Nodes correspond to theobjects or part-level
interactive elementsrequired to accomplish the task, while edges capture bothfunctional relation-
ships(e.g.,control,open or close) andspatial relationships(e.g.,close,in front of,
lower than).
This example corresponds to the instruction“Turn on the television”, where the relevant nodes
are theremote controland theTV, connected by acontrolfunctional edge and spatial relations
lower than,in front of, andclose.
In addition, each subgraph is grounded inmulti-view observations. For every scene, we provide
synchronized RGB images captured from multiple viewpoints. This multi-view grounding allows
the annotated subgraphs to be consistently aligned with visual evidence, supporting both instruction-
conditioned graph prediction from perception and multi-view reasoning tasks.
17\n\n--- page 18 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
1{
2"subgraph_id": "da21b9f9-f4fa-4a85-961b-2e2c2e182d3e",
3"scene_id": "466828",
4"action_type": "press",
5"function_type": "device_control",
6"task_instruction": "Turn on the television.",
7"nodes": [
8{"label": "remote control", "id": "f15474de-7b35-4a5e-ac8a-dc02f93960b3"},
9{"label": "tv", "id": "91486017-94ce-4788-aabd-0d07262c9bed"}
10],
11"edges": [
12{
13"relation_id": "ef3e72fe-ae9f-42e4-9b5a-505b5cb1844a",
14"functional_relationship": "control",
15"object1": {"label": "remote control", "id": "f15474de-7b35-4a5e-ac8a-dc02f93960b3"},
16"object2": {"label": "tv", "id": "91486017-94ce-4788-aabd-0d07262c9bed"},
17"spatial_relations": ["lower_than", "in_front_of", "close"],
18"is_touching": false
19}
20]
21}
Figure 8: Example JSON annotation for the task “Turn on the television.”
A.1.4 MULTI-ASPECTSTATISTICS OF THETRAININGDATASET
Our dataset consists of approximately 1,050 subgraphs and 6278 multi-view RGB images, collected
across more than 350 diverse household scenes and encompassing 93 distinct task instructions. This
broad coverage ensures rich variability in scene layouts, object configurations, and interaction types.
To provide a comprehensive overview of our training data, we present multi-aspect statistics cov-
ering scene context, action diversity, functional relationships, and object distributions. As shown
in Fig. 9, the dataset spans four common household room types and captures the correspondence
between action types and functional categories, reflecting the diversity and richness of real-world
manipulation scenarios. Fig. 10 illustrates the distribution of action types across different room
contexts, while Fig. 11 summarizes the prevalence of various functional relationships and Fig. 12
summarizes the frequency of object occurrences. Together, these statistics highlight the diversity and
task relevance of our dataset, ensuring broad coverage of spatial–functional interactions essential for
embodied planning and reasoning.
(a) Room-type distribution.
 (b) Action–function correspondence.
Figure 9: Dataset statistics: (a) Distribution across four room types; (b)Heatmap showing the corre-
spondence between action types and functional types.
18\n\n--- page 19 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 10: Task distribution across four room types: kitchen, living room, bedroom, and bathroom.
Figure 11: Distribution of functional relationships across all tasks in the dataset.
A.2 TRAININGDETAILS
We train our model using 8× 80GB A100 GPUs for approximately 13 hours based on the
EasyR1 (Zheng et al., 2025b) training framework. The complete training configuration for DAPO
algorithm is presented in Table 4.
A.3 TRAININGCURVE
Figure 13 and 14 shows the training curves during DAPO optimization. The training and validation
curves closely align across all metrics, indicating good generalization without significant overfitting.
Theoverall rewardconverges to∼0.93, whileaccuracy rewardstabilizes at∼0.9. Theformat
rewardquickly reaches 1.0 within the first 25 steps, showing the model rapidly learns to produce
valid JSON-structured outputs.
A.4 MOMAGRAPHBENCHMARK
A.4.1 BENCHMARKDESIGN
To rigorously evaluate spatial–functional reasoning and task planning capabilities, we design a com-
prehensive multi-choice VQA benchmark based on the scenes and tasks in our dataset. Rather than
manually crafting all questions, we leverage large vision–language models (VLMs) to generate them
in a scalable and diverse manner. Specifically, we provide the model with structured prompts de-
scribing the scene images, state-aware scene graph, and task instructions, and instruct it to produce
question–answer pairs that probe different reasoning skills, such as spatial relation understanding,
affordance inference, precondition reasoning, and goal decomposition. To ensure the reliability and
19\n\n--- page 20 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 12: Statistics of object occurrences, highlighting the most frequent objects in tasks.
Figure 13: Training reward curves duringMomaGraph-R1training.
correctness of the benchmark, all generated questions and answers undergo several rounds of manual
verification, during which ambiguous or low-quality samples are refined or removed.
Moreover, since the benchmark is formulated as a multi-choice VQA task with clearly defined cor-
rect answers, it does not require complex evaluation metrics. Model performance can be directly
measured by simple accuracy — i.e., the proportion of correctly answered questions — which pro-
vides an intuitive and reliable indicator of spatial–functional reasoning and planning capabilities.
This simplicity enables straightforward comparison across models while ensuring that the evalua-
tion remains rigorous and meaningful.
Data Source and Task Scope.We leverage long video sequences from SceneFun3D (Delitzas et al.,
2024) that capture human-recorded layouts of entire indoor environments, from which key frames
are extracted and manually annotated with task-specific graphs. To enhance diversity and coverage,
we additionally collect data from real indoor scenes. Our benchmark spans four representative
indoor room categories:bathroom, kitchen, living room, and bedroom. The task scope is organized
into four levels of difficulty:
T1 Single-step actions:e.g., turning on a light, pulling a drawer, opening a door.
T2 Two complementary steps:e.g., filling a bathtub by first pressing the drain button and
then turning on the faucet.
T3 Multi-step or preconditioned tasks:e.g., making coffee (pick up a cup→add water→
start the coffee machine).
T4 Dynamic verification tasks:e.g., when the target object is missing, the system must per-
formgraph-based replanningand identifyalternative interactive objects.
20\n\n--- page 21 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 4: DAPO Training Configuration
Parameter Value
Model Configuration
Base Model Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct
Mixed Precision bfloat16
Training Setup
Total Epochs 25
Training Steps 175
Actor Global Batch Size 128
Critic Global Batch Size 256
Micro Batch Size (Actor) 1
Micro Batch Size (Critic) 4
Optimization
Learning Rate 1e-6
Optimizer AdamW
Weight Decay 0.01
Beta1, Beta2 0.9, 0.999
Gradient Clipping 1.0
DAPO Algorithm
KL Coefficient 0.01
KL Penalty low var kl
Disable KL True
Clip Ratio Low 0.2
Clip Ratio High 0.28
Clip Ratio Dual 3.0
Reward Function
Format Weight 0.2
Max Response Length 2048
Overlong Penalty Factor 0.5
Generation Config
Temperature 1.0
Top-p 1.0
Rollout Samples 5
Figure 14: Validation reward curves duringMomaGraph-R1training.
B ADDITIONALABLATIONSTUDIES
B.1 COMPARISON WITHSFTANDICL BASELINES
To validate our choice of RL-based training over alternative learning paradigms, we compare our
method against two additional baselines:
21\n\n--- page 22 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
•SFT baseline:We fine-tune Qwen2.5-VL-7B on MomaGraph-Scenes using supervised
learning only (without RL), with the same graph-alignment objectives as our full method.
•ICL baseline:We evaluate the base model with 3-5 in-context graph examples provided
in the prompt (same setting as Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct (w/ Graph) in Table 2 and 3 of the
main paper).
Method BLINK MomaGraph-Bench (Overall)
SFT baseline 60.4 63.9
ICL baseline 58.7 60.2
RL w/ Graph (Ours) 63.5 71.6
Table 5: Comparison of our RL-based training with SFT and ICL baselines. Our method achieves
substantially better performance on both benchmarks.
As shown in Table 5, our RL training method achieves clearly superior performance compared to
both the SFT baseline (+3.1 on BLINK, +7.7 on MomaGraph-Bench) and the ICL baseline (+4.8
on BLINK, +11.4 on MomaGraph-Bench). This demonstrates that the RL formulation is crucial
for learning high-quality scene graph generation that effectively improves downstream planning
performance.
B.2 REWARDWEIGHTSENSITIVITYSTUDY
We follow the original DAPO implementation in the EasyR1 framework for default settings ofw f
andw l in Eq. 2 of the main paper. We conduct a sensitivity study by varying(w a, wf , wl)around
the default configuration:
Setting IDw a wf wl BLINK MomaGraph-Bench (Overall)
A 0.5 0.5 0.5 61.3 68.2
B 0.7 0.3 0.5 63.1 70.9
C 0.8 0.2 0.7 63.7 71.2
Default 0.8 0.2 0.5 63.5 71.6
Table 6: Sensitivity analysis of reward weights(w a, wf , wl)in our DAPO training. The model’s
performance remains stable across different weight configurations.
As shown in Table 6, the model’s performance remains stable across these weight configurations,
with variations of less than 2.4% on BLINK and 3.4% on MomaGraph-Bench. This indicates low
sensitivity to reward-weight choices and demonstrates the robustness of our training approach.
B.3 DETAILEDREAL-WORLDDEMONSTRATIONS.
To provide a closer look into the behavior of our system, this section presents fine-grained real-
world examples. We illustrate how the model processes raw images captured in realistic household
environments, transforms them into task-oriented scene graphs, and generates corresponding planner
outputs. These case studies highlight the system’s ability to capture subtle details, encode them into
structured graphs, and reason over them to produce actionable plans.
To validate the effectiveness of our approach in real-world settings, we deploy the system on a
mobile manipulator to perform a variety of everyday tasks, as shown in Fig. 15. These tasks span
multiple functional categories, such as turning off a light, opening a microwave, turning on a TV , and
opening a cabinet. In each case, the robot leverages the predicted spatial–functional scene graph to
plan and execute a sequence of actions without task-specific fine-tuning. The successful completion
of these tasks demonstrates the system’s ability to generalize from structured graph representations
to real-world interaction scenarios, highlighting its potential for practical household assistance.
22\n\n--- page 23 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 15: Real-world robot execution of household tasks.
Figure 16: Real-world example ofMomaGraph-R1performing the task “Open the Cabinet.” From
multiview images, the system generates a scene graph capturing spatial–functional relations and
outputs the corresponding action plan.
23\n\n--- page 24 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 17: Real-world example ofMomaGraph-R1performing the task “Turn off the light.” From
multiview images, the system generates a scene graph capturing spatial–functional relations and
outputs the corresponding action plan.
24\n\n--- page 25 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 18: Real-world example ofMomaGraph-R1performing the task “Open the microwave.”
From multiview images, the system generates a scene graph capturing spatial–functional relations
and outputs the corresponding action plan.
25\n\n--- page 26 ---\n\nPublished as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Figure 19: Real-world example ofMomaGraph-R1performing the task “Turn on the TV .” From
multiview images, the system generates a scene graph capturing spatial–functional relations and
outputs the corresponding action plan.
26\n