REAL METHOD of "Any-Subgroup Equivariant Networks via Symmetry Breaking" (arXiv 2603.19486v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, equivariant architectures are usually highly constrained, designed for symmetries chosena priori, and not applicable to datasets with other symmetries. In particular, we start with a fully permutation-equivariant base model, and then obtain subgroup equivariance by using a symmetry-breaking input whose automorphism group is that subgroup. We overcome this by relaxing from exact to ap- proximate symmetry breaking, leveraging the notion of 2-closure to derive fast algorithms. Empirically, we validate our method on symmetry selection for graph and image tasks, as well as multitask and transfer learning for sequence tasks, showing that a single network equivariant to multiple permutation subgroups outperforms both separate equivariant models and a single non-equivariant model. 1 INTRODUCTION Equivariant machine learning exploits symmetries in data to constrain the model with known priors, often leading to improved generalization [Elesedy and Zaidi, 2021; Petrache and Trivedi, 2023], interpretability [Bogatskiy et al., 2024], and efficiency [Bietti et al., 2021]. (I) equivariant architectures typically require deriving and implementing group-specific equivariant layers, so substantial research and engineering must be done for architectural design whenever a new type of symmetry arises, and (II) equivariant architectures are typically only equivariant to one symmetry group, and significantly differ across symmetries. In this work, we introduce a framework for buildingflexibleequivariant networks, namedAny- Subgroup Equivariant Networks(ASEN). Given a base group G, we consider its subgroups G≤G (typically known a priori) that capture the symmetries intrinsic to the domain (e.g. To design a subgroup-equivariant model f, we start with a base network hθ, which is equivariant to the large groupG and thus overly constrained for our purpose — it cannot represent functions that are equivariant only toG but not G\G . To reduce the amount of constraints, we augment the inputx with a feature v that break the symmetries in G\G but maintain the symmetries in G. 3 METHOD 3.1 GENERAL METHOD(ASEN) Here, we describe our general framework for ASEN. (i) a method of parameterizing the base model hθ that is equivariant to the larger group G, and (ii) a way to construct or compute a symmetry breaking object v with automorphism group Aut(v) =G . In this subsection, we show that when G=S n is the symmetric group acting as permutation matrices on n objects, we can leverage existing equivariant architectures for (i); and we can develop a practical algorithm for (ii). Algorithm 1 provides the procedure to compute A(2) with high-level SymPy commands, assuming access to the generating elements of G 1; see Fig. Algorithm 1Compute Edge OrbitsA (2) such thatAut(A (2)) =G (2) (SymPy commands) Require:Generatorsσ 1, . Lemma 1.If a one-layer MPNN hθ uses injective functions for (hyper-)edge feature update ψe, node update ϕ, and (hyper-)edge multiset aggregation τ, and if the node features are distinct, then hθ is not equivariant to permutations inS n \GwhereG= Aut(A (2)). Rn →R n for each i then the G-MLP has order 1. 5.2.2)? ArchitectureOur backbone is a permutation-equivariant graph neural network (GNN), composed of input layers (e.g. embedding, MLP), followed by four layers of GATv2 message-passing [Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017], and concluded with output layers (e.g., projection, aggregation). The training cost, using a message-passing GNN backbone, scales as O(mn2) on a fully-connected dense graph where m is the number of training data points, and O(m|E|) on a sparse graph where |E| is the number of edges. Specifically, for each subgroup G in a candidate set chosen a priori, we train a new instance of ASEN with edge features satisfying Aut(A(2)) =G (2) (or positional features satisfying Aut(A(1)) =G (1)). [2023] that constructs distinct G-equivariant MLPs for each group, ASEN offers a unified architecture to flexibly model different G-equivariance by symmetry breaking (i.e., via positional or edge features). one training only on r units (“1 unit” represents 2,500 datapoints) of asingle-task, and the other training on r units with ntask = 3 tasks, specifically Intersect, Cyclic Sum, and Palindrome (see Tab. As the compute cost scales linearly with both training set size and the number of tasks (see Fig. 9 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 0 10 20 30 40 Epoch 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8Validation/uni00A0Loss Pretrained Finetune/uni00A0Only Figure 7: DetectCapital Palindrome Longestpal Intersect 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5Loss ASEN-Pretrain ASEN-NoPretrain NoSym-Pretrain NoSym-NoPretrain Figure 8: 5.2.2 TRANSFERLEARNINGAPPLICATIONS Beyond multitask training, we explore transfer learning by pretraining on tasks with diverse sym- metries and then finetuning on a new task with a distinct symmetry. Afinetune-onlybaseline trained from scratch using only the chosen task data, and apretrainedmodel initialized via joint training on 1.5 units each of the other tasks, followed by fine-tuning on the chosen task data. 7 shows that pretraining ASEN achieves significantly better generalization compared to training from scratch on the Intersect task, showcasing ASEN as an effective initialization for related downstream tasks. 8 shows that pretraining ASEN with the correctly specified symmetry outperforms its trivial symmetry baseline, and pretraining has a larger transfer effect when symmetry is provided on the Detect Capital and Palindrome tasks. As a first step, we consider modeling symmetry (sub)groups acting globally on the input; a natural next step is to incorporate local symmetries, which play a key role for molecular graph applications [Thiede et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024]). A practical method for constructing equivariant multilayer perceptrons for arbitrary matrix groups. Pretraining codomain attention neural operators for solving multiphysics PDEs.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37: Lemma 1.If a one-layer MPNN hθ uses injective functions for (hyper-)edge feature update ψe, node update ϕ, and (hyper-)edge multiset aggregation τ, and if the node features are distinct, then hθ is not equivariant to permutations inS n \GwhereG= Aut(A (2)). Then the new node representation for nodeiafter this layer is T(x) i = qX l=1 al(Blx)i (19) = qX l=1 al nX j=1 Bl ijxj (20) = nX j=1 xj qX l=1 alBl ij (21) This can be interpreted as message passing, where the node j passes message xj Pq l=1 alBl ij to the node 