REAL METHOD of "Post-hoc Probabilistic Vision-Language Models" (arXiv 2412.06014v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we propose post-hoc uncertainty estimation in VLMs that does not require additional training. Our method leverages a Bayesian posterior approximation over the last layers in VLMs and analytically quantifies uncertainties over cosine similarities. We introduce an efficient and effective post-hoc method to provide uncertainty estimates for vision-language models (e.g., CLIP, SigLIP) using a Laplace approximation. 1 INTRODUCTION Pre-trained large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) (Bordes et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023), have achieved remarkable success in tasks like zero-shot classification, retrieval, and generation, driven by training on billion-scale data sets (Gadre et al., 2023; Schuhmann et al., 2022). For example, calibration methods cannot capture epistemic uncertainties, adapter and retraining-based methods ∗Work partially done during an internship at Aalto University. come with substantial computational demands and require retraining in streaming/active learning settings, and test-time adaptation methods significantly increase inference costs. The method should be applicable to any VLM architecture (model-agnostic), and uncertainties should be obtained in apost-hocmanner without retraining the model from scratch. Finally, the method should extract uncertainties from the original VLM without adding new layers or adapters that require training (training-free). This work proposes BayesVLM, an efficient and effective post-hoc uncertainty quantification method for pre-trained VLMs that adheres to the outlined desiderata. We leverage a Laplace approximation (MacKay, 1992) to the Bayesian posterior, thereby eliminating the need for additional training, architectural changes, or modifications to the training objective. For this, we introduce independent probabilistic models for each modality, adhering to the i.i.d. Lastly, we assess the efficiency and robustness of our approach (BayesVLM) and find that BayesVLM provides efficient, effective, and robust uncertainty estimates, even when the VLM is pre-trained on proprietary data. (i)we propose BayesVLM, an efficient and effective post-hoc method for uncertainty quantification in pre-trained VLMs, without architecture changes or further training (Sec. 2 2 RELATED WORK Vision-language modelsModels like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023), trained on massive data sets such as LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022), have become widespread in various applications, including zero-shot classification, generative modeling (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2024), and retrieval (Saito et al., 2023; Karthik et al., 2024). Uncertainty in vision-language modelsQuantifying uncertainties in VLMs has observed increasing interest, with approaches involving learning probabilistic embeddings, for example, by learning additional probabilistic adapters (Chun et al., 2025; Lafon et al., 2025) or through pre-training/fine- tuning with a probabilistic loss (Chun, 2024; Ju et al., 2025). 3.1 BACKGROUND Language-image pre-trainingWe consider VLMs trained by minimising the InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018) (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) and present additional experiments for the SigLIP loss (Zhai et al., 2023). Recently, the SigLIP loss (Zhai et al., 2023) was proposed as an alternative to the InfoNCE loss, a binary classification loss over cosine similarities. assumption, the probabilistic model for the image modality is xIMG i ˆgi = Pϕ(x IMG i ) ∥Pϕ(x IMG i )∥ image encoderϕ(·)and image projection layerP ˆH ˆgi, giventext embeddings ˆH compute logits and the likelihood becomes a categorical distribution (see Sec. For this, we first formulated probabilistic models admissible to a Bayesian treatment and then utilised a post-hoc posterior approximation over the last layer of each encoder. Since retrieval methods rely on similarity scores in a shared embedding space, uncertainties over the embedding projections can be incorporated into the retrieval process. LimitationsThe limitations of our approach are(i)we need access to training data to estimate the Hessian,(ii)we require that embeddings are Gaussian distributed,(iii)our method only utilises Bayesian projection layers, and(iv)we assume independence between image and text projection parameters in the local curvature approximation. Moreover, we provided algorithmic descriptions of our method in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, outlining the precomputation of BayesVLM and the forward inference. Here, we apply the Laplace approximation to estimate uncertainties directly from the pre-trained VLM without the need for additional training, architectural changes, or training from scratch. Our approach estimates a Bayesian posterior distribution with the pre-training data or a proxy data set before test time and has a similar inference speed to the pre-trained VLM. B.2 LANGUAGE-IMAGE PRE-TRAINING We consider VLMs trained by minimising the InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018) (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) or the SigLIP loss (Zhai et al., 2023). Recently, the SigLIP loss (Zhai et al., 2023) has been proposed as an alternative to the InfoNCE loss, aimed at improving numerical stability and training speed. Input:VLM encoders {IMG,TXT} , train- ing dataD 2:for eachencoder ENC∈ {IMG,TXT}do 3:ComputeA ENC factor with Eq. (81)) 7:(Optional)Find optimalτor setτ= 1 8:for eachencoder ENC∈ {IMG,TXT}do 9:Update eAENC ← √τ AENC + √ λ I 10:Update eBENC ← √τ BENC + √ λ I 11:end for 12:Return:{( eAIMG , eBIMG ),( eATXT , eBTXT )} Algorithm 2Compute Predictions 1:Input:BayesVLM,(x IMG , xTXT ) Compute embeddings using Eq. LInfoNCE(X IMG ,X TXT )≈ X B LInfoNCE(X IMG B ,X TXT B ).(19) For each batch, we can view the InfoNCE loss as two separate classification losses, one over image inputs and the other over text inputs. We can see that the loss is equivalent to the cross-entropy loss on the following model, where label yIMG i is a one-hot encoded vector withi-th element equal to one, xIMG i ˆgi = Pϕ(x IMG i ) ∥Pϕ(x IMG i )∥ Image encoderϕ(·)and image projection layerP ˆH ˆgi. use text embeddings ˆH to compute logit 20 Similarly, the text loss LTXT CE (X TXT ,X IMG ) can be viewed as cross-entropy loss on the following model where labely TXT i is a one-hot encoded vector withi-th element equal to one, xTXT i ˆhi = Qψ(xTXT i ) ∥Qψ(xTXT i )∥ Text encoderψ(·)and text projection layerQ ˆGˆhi. use image embeddings ˆG to compute logit U