REAL METHOD of "Beyond Short Steps in Frank-Wolfe Algorithms" (arXiv 2501.18773v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Beyond Short Steps in Frank-Wolfe Algorithms David Martínez-Rubio 1 2 Sebastian Pokutta 3 1 Abstract We introduce novel techniques to enhance Frank- Wolfe algorithms by leveraging function smooth- ness beyond traditional short steps. Our study focuses on Frank-Wolfe algorithms with step sizes that incorporate primal-dual guarantees, of- fering practical stopping criteria. Additionally, we propose a gen- eralized short-step strategy aimed at optimizing a computable primal-dual gap. Interestingly, this new generalized short-step strategy is also ap- plicable to gradient descent algorithms beyond Frank-Wolfe methods. Empirical results demonstrate that our optimistic algorithm outper- forms existing methods, highlighting its practical advantages. The Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), also known as the conditional gradient al- gorithm (Levitin & Polyak, 1966), is a key algorithm for this problem class, particularly for problems where projec- tion onto a constraint set is computationally expensive, as it does not require projections. In contrast to classical analyses where a step-size strategy and corresponding convergence rate need to be heuristically estimated and then proven by induction, in the primal-dual setup they emerge naturally as a natu- ral consequence of the analysis. A well-known strategy for FW algorithms is the so-called short step, which essentially chooses the step size to maximize primal guaran- teed progress from the descent lemma, see (Frank & Wolfe, 1956)); and also (Braun et al., 2022) for an in-depth discus- sion. We introduce the concept of primal-dual short steps, that maximize primal-dual guaranteed progress based on a model obtained from the primal-dual analysis. We also show that this new step-size strategy is also applicable to gradient descent algorithms. Moreover, recent advancements have introduced adaptive step-size strategies, such as, e.g., (Pe- dregosa et al., 2020) (see also (Pokutta, 2024) for a numeri- cally improved version), which further refine the short-step. These strategies aim to decrease a model of the function adaptively, enhancing the algorithm’s performance and sta- bility and in particular allow for leveraging local curva- 1 arXiv:2501.18773v1 [math.OC] 30 Jan 2025 Beyond Short Steps in Frank-Wolfe Algorithms ture information. However, they come at the extra cost of a line search like procedure and are subject to the same lower bounds as the classical short steps (Guélat & Marcotte, 1986). Optimistic Frank-Wolfe Algorithm We introduce a novel Frank-Wolfe algorithm that leverages the concept of optimism, as discussed in (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013; Steinhardt & Liang, 2014). Primal-Dual Short Steps We propose a new class of step-size rules for existing Frank-Wolfe algorithms, termed primal-dual short steps. These steps are based on the se- quential minimization of a primal-dual gap defined in the algorithm’s analysis at each iteration. This approach is flex- ible and extends to gradient descent algorithms, allowing for line search over the primal-dual gap in both algorithm classes. Related Work The Frank-Wolfe algorithm, originally introduced by Frank & Wolfe (1956) where also short steps were introduced, is a foundational method in projection-free optimization, par- ticularly for problems involving convex constraints. Levitin & Polyak (1966) further extended the method, which they referred to as conditional gradient algorithm . 3 Beyond Short Steps in Frank-Wolfe Algorithms Although short steps induce monotonic primal progress by definition, they do not necessarily induce monotonic primal- dual progress, which is the important measure to look at when we require a stopping criterion. An Optimistic Frank-Wolfe algorithm In this section, we propose a new Frank-Wolfe method that at each iteration, uses a prediction of the next gradient in order to minimize a suitable regularized lower model of the objective. The algorithm and analysis is based on optimistic versions of the Online Mirror Descent (OMD) algorithm and of the Fol- low the Regularized Leader (FTRL) algorithm. The starting point of the method, as in (2), is defining a lower bound on the optimal value, which we do by tak- ing inspiration on the anytime online-to-batch conversion of Cutkosky (2019), that connects the regret of online learning algorithms with convergence guarantees of opti- mization methods. We use an optimistic FTRL algorithm (Line 7) or an op- timistic MD algorithm (Line 7) with constant step size , designed to work for subdifferentiable losses. Interesting, while it is well-known that for constant step size and uncon- strained problems, FTRL and OMD have the same updates, we note the more general property that in the constrained setting, FTRL is an instance of OMD with subdifferentiable regularizers for a precise choice of subgradients, cf. We note that the decay of the term involving ψ is just a consequence of our choice of step sizes, which we used 4 Beyond Short Steps in Frank-Wolfe Algorithms Algorithm 2 Optimistic Frank-Wolfe algorithms Input: Primal-dual short steps A key step of the analysis in most Frank-Wolfe algorithms for smooth problems, such as in Section 2, consists of using the smoothness inequality in order to guarantee some de- scent that compensates other per-iteration errors that appear. The key idea of our new step-size rule consists of taking the primal-dual gap (1) that is defined for the analyses with the structure of (3), and choosing the step size in order to maximize the guaranteed progress in terms of this primal- dual gap. Primal-dual short steps for FW algorithms Let us consider first the case of FW and FW-HB. a norm ∥ · ∥, and D def = max x,y∈X ∥x − y∥, then using the step (5) or line search on the RHS of (6) above, for either algorithm, we obtain: 5 Beyond Short Steps in Frank-Wolfe Algorithms The convergence above for the line search is derived from the one for the primal-dual short step, since the right hand side of (5) upper bounds the one of (6). We note that, naturally, if we define the gap as Gt def = f (xt+1) − f (x∗), which is the primal gap, then analyz- ing the algorithm with the strategy in (3), yields that the primal-dual short steps become regular short steps. Primal-dual short steps for Gradient Descent We now extend the analysis of our primal-dual short steps to the gradient descent algorithm (GD) whose updates are given by xt+1 ← xt − at∇f (xt). If further f is L-smooth with respect to ∥ · ∥2, GD us