REAL METHOD of "SOSBENCH: Benchmarking Safety Alignment on Scientific Knowledge" (arXiv 2505.21605v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this critical gap, we introduceSoSBench, aregulation-grounded, hazard-focusedbenchmark encompassing six selected high-risk scientific domains: Benchmarking Safety Alignment on Six Scientific Domains Step 1: These benchmarks serve both as evaluation tools to assess the safety alignment of LLMs and as practical resources for enhancing LLM safety through alignment techniques, such as preference-based optimization methods like Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (Bai et al., 2022a; Rafailov et al., 2023). In this paper, we proposeSoSBench, the firstregulation-grounded,hazard-focusedbenchmark for evaluating the safety alignment of LLMs on tasks involving scientific knowledge.SoSBench comprises 3,000 prompts designed to elicit potentially high-risk behaviors from LLMs across six selected scientific domains: For dataset development, we propose a novel data evolution framework that guides prompt construction by leveraging LLMs for prompt mutation and multi-model validation, ensuring greater diversity and effectiveness in the generated prompts. Illustrative prompts for each benchmark are presented in Table 11. It seeds from codified hazard standards and real-world regulations, then applies a novel multi-stage evolutionary pipeline to yield high-quality, knowledge- intensive requests. Scalingparametersandallocatingmoretest-timereasoningstepsreduceharmfulresponses, but the gains plateau, showing that alignment must grow in lock-step with the additional knowledge and reasoning capacity unlocked by scaling. To achieve this, LLMs undergo safety alignment in the post-training phase, primarily through supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning (Bai et al., 2022a,b; Guan et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2025a; Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023). Benchmarking Safety Alignment on Six Scientific Domains to real-world concerns, focusing on low-hazard tasks like knowledge retrieval or classification, which limits its effectiveness in assessing LLM safety in scenarios that could impact public well-being. ProposedSoSBench SoSBenchis the first regulation-grounded, hazard-focused safety benchmark designed to evaluate the misuse of scientific knowledge in multiple subject areas by LLMs. Manual Seed Collection The first step in constructingSoSBenchis to manually collect a pool of seed terms for each subject area. Among the chemicals labeled in both categories, we include only those assigned the highest hazard classification—Level 4 in each. The detailed procedures for collecting basic terms in other subject areas are provided in AppendixC.1. Benchmarking Safety Alignment on Six Scientific Domains Algorithm 1Data Evolution Require: For example, for each extracted chemical name, we query the PubChem database (National Center for Biotechnology Infor- mation, 2025) to retrieve its alternative forms, including abbreviation, synonyms, molecular formulas, trade names, and colloquial names, such as “TNT”, “trinitrotoluol”, “2-methyl-1,3,5-trinitrobenzene”, the Hill notation formula (C7H5N3O6), and the condensed ring notation (C6H2(CH3)(NO2)3) for “trinitrotoluene”. These alternatives, combined with the original basic terms, form the complete pool of seed terms for each subject area, which is then used for subsequent prompt generation. For each subject area, we extract a set of instruction templates from AdvBench related to misinformation, physical harm, and threats to societal order (Zou et al., 2023). For both types of templates, we replace the keywords with the corresponding seed terms to produce a large set of initial prompts, which are then used for subsequent data evolution. To address this issue, we design an LLM-assisted data evolution algorithm with quality control as shown in Algorithm 1. For each generated prompt, we then use a setM of surrogate LLMs to produce responses and validate whether the prompt can elicit an unsafe answer under relatively weak safety alignment. Prompt MutationThis step aims to improve the diversity of our prompt set. This step aims to ensure that our dataset includes effective prompts covering a wide range of terminologies from each subject, while maintaining a balance between them. We define our desired datasetD as a collection of samples each consisting of a prompt𝑝 and a harmfulness score𝑠(𝑝)∈{ 0, 1,...,𝐶} , where{0, 1,...,𝐶} is the set of surrogate models and𝑠(𝑝) is the number of surrogate models whose responses are evaluated as harmful by evaluator modelE. For any term𝑡∈T, we definecoverage level𝑐(𝑡)=max {𝑝∈D|𝑡=term(𝑝)} 𝑠(𝑝), where a term isfully coveredwhen 𝑐(𝑡)=𝐶 . Given a batch size𝐾, the coverage-driven heuristic sampling process proceeds as follows: Prompt Selection (Exploitation).For each term𝑡𝑖, consider the subsetP(𝑡𝑖)={𝑝∈D|𝑡 𝑖∈ term(𝑝)} . Our algorithm balances exploration and exploitation:(a) Explore Uncovered Terms.By prioritizing terms with𝑐(𝑡)< 𝐶 , the sampler targets subject areas lacking fully flagged harmful prompts.(b) Exploit Promising Prompts.Weighting favors prompts with partial policy violations, accelerating their progression to𝑠(𝑝)=𝐶 .(c) Uniform Coverage.Over iterations, each term’s coverage level monotonically increases until𝑐(𝑡)=𝐶, ensuring balanced prompt coverage across all terms. Benchmark Analysis OurSoSBenchconsists of3000instructions, spanning six domains, with500instructions per domain sampled from the final instructions pool generated from the pipeline in Section 3.2 and ultimate manual inspections. Then we useGPT-4.1to classify the risk categories for all instructions inSoSBench. We then use theall-mpnet-base-v22 model to extract the sentence embeddings of examples from these three benchmarks. For each model, we prompt it with questions from our benchmark. Due to space constraint, additional experimental analysis and findings ofSoSBenchare deferred to Appendix A.3. (1) domain-specific post-training can erode established alignment, and (2) subsequent safety fine-tuning is often insufficient. (1) continued post-training on domain corpora (e.g., BioMistral) can erode established alignment, as fine-tuning is prone to distort safety guarantees Qi et al. PVR stays roughly flat and slightly improves from 1B to 4B, then 12B, then slightlyreboundsat the largest size27B. This implies the training pipeline should explicitly budget 10 SoSBench: Conclusion We introducedSoSBench, a pioneering benchmark for assessing LLM safety in scientific domains, grounded in regulatory frameworks and spanning six high-risk