REAL METHOD of "On The Expressive Power of GNN Derivatives" (arXiv 2510.02565v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Research on GNN expressivity has produced many expressive architectures, leading to architecture hierarchies with models of increasing expressive power. We introduce High-Order Derivative GNN (HOD-GNN), a novel method that enhances the expressivity of Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) by leveraging high-order node derivatives of the base model. These derivatives generate expressive structure-aware node embeddings processed by a second GNN in an end-to-end trainable architecture. While these identifiers are often implemented through an explicit, often discrete, perturbations to the node features, our approach instead computes derivatives of the MPNN output, capturing the effect ofinfinitesimalperturbations. a base MPNN, a derivative encoder network, and a downstream GNN.1-HOD-GNN computes high-order derivatives of the base MPNN with respect to the features of asinglenode at a time, i.e., ∂αh(T) v ∂X α u and ∂αhout ∂X α u . These derivatives are then encoded into new derivative-aware node features via the encoder network, which are then passed to the downstream GNN. This tensor is then used to construct new node features using a higher-order encoder network (as in Maron et al.[46], Morris et al. To this end, we develop a novel algorithm for computing these derivatives via an analytic, message-passing-like procedure. First, being fully analytic, it enables differentiation through the derivative computation itself, allowing HOD-GNN to be trained end-to-end. Combined with the empirical observation that HOD-GNN remains effective even when using base MPNNs with small hidden dimensions, our method scales to benchmarks containing larger graphs that are often out of reach for other expressive GNN architectures. Our contributions.(1) We introduce k-HOD-GNN, a novel expressive GNN family that integrates derivative-based embeddings; (2) We provide a theoretical analysis of its expressivity and computational properties; (3) We propose an algorithm for efficient derivative computation on graphs; (4) We demonstrate consistently high empirical performance across seven standard graph classification and regression benchmarks. We then introduce k-HOD-GNN, an expressive GNN architecture that enhances representational power by leveraging derivatives of a base MPNN. 3.2 The 1-HOD-GNN architecture Overview.A 1-HOD-GNN model, denoted Φ, consists of two GNNs: Given an input graph, we compute the outputs and derivatives of a base MPNN. (1) Compute the final node representations and output of M; (2) Compute derivative tensors of the output with respect to the input node features (defined below); (3) Use Unode and Uout to extract new derivative informed node features from the derivative tensors. Importantly, we develop an efficient algorithm for step (2) that enables backpropagation through the derivative computation itself, making all four above steps differentiable (see Section 3.2.1). Steps 1 & 2.In the first two stages, we compute the final node representations h(T) and the output vector hout using the base MPNNM, along with their corresponding derivative tensors, defined below: Derivative tensors are computed using Algorithm 1, described in Section 3.2.1 and elaborated on in Appendix D. Crucially, Algorithm 1 is fully differentiable with respect to the weights ofM, enabling end-to-end training ofΦ. Step 3.In the third stage of our method, we extract new node features from the derivative tensors Dout and D(T) using the encoder networks Unode and Uout. We can thus define the encoder network Unode :R n2×d′×d×m →R n× ¯d to be any GNN 4 PREPRINT architecture which maps adjacency matrices with edge features to node feature matrices. For the remainder of this work, we assume T is an MPNN, though our approach is compatible with any GNN architecture. Iteratively applying these two steps yields the final node-wise derivative tensor D(T) through a differentiable, message-passing-like procedure. At each layer t, the derivative aggregation step (Equation 10) increases the number of non-zero entries only in proportion to the number of node pairs that exchange messages for the first time. First, we compute the output and final node representations of M along with the k-indexed derivative tensors D(T) k and Dout k . First, while k-HOD-GNN computes derivative tensors D(t) k with O(nk+1) potential entries, these tensors are sparse for relatively shallow base MPNNs. Focusing next on the encoder networks, we show that they can be designed to exploit derivative sparsity for improved efficiency, while retaining the full expressivity of thek-OSAN architecture: First, motivated by its connection to positional/structural encodings (PSEs, Section 4), we considerencoding-augmented MPNNs, including Laplacian PEs [25], RWSEs [23], SignNet [43], random node identifiers [1, 62], as well as recent methods such as GPSE [16] and MOSE [7]. Steps 1 & 2.In the first two stages, , we compute the final node representationsh (T) and the output vectorh out using the base MPNN M, along with their corresponding derivative tensors defined below (the k-indexed derivative tensor was defined in Section 3.3 for he case where the input features are 1-dimensional). Dk(h)[u, i,α] =∂αhi(X0).(19) The derivative tensors D(T) k =D(h (T) )k and Dout k =D(h out)k are computed using a message-passing-like procedure detailed in Appendix 1, which enables both efficient computation and allows us to backpropagate through it, supporting end-to-end training ofk-HOD-GNN. Step 3.In the third stage of our method, we extract new node features informed by the derivative tensors D(T) k ,D out k , using the encoder networks Unode :R n×nk×d′×md×k →R n×d′′ and Uout :R nk×d′×md×k →R n×d′′ . h(t) v =MLP( ˜h(t−1) v ).(24) Our algorithm begins by computing the initial derivative tensor D(0) (we abuse notation and ommit the subscript k), and then recursively constructs each ˜D (t−1) =D( ˜h(t−1)) from D(t−1) and then D(t) from ˜D (t−1) . To analyze the time and memory complexity of each step, we define the derivative sparsity of a nodev of an input graph Gat layertof the base MPNN, as the number of non-zero derivatives corresponding toh (t) v . Since this architecture can approximate the original architecture to arbitrary precision, we may assume without loss of generality thatMproduces 1-dimensional node embeddings. Step 1For each k-tuple of nodes u∈V k(Gi) and matrix Y∈R k×k, we define the node feature matrix broadu(Y)∈ Rn×k (here we abuse notation and not include the gr