REAL METHOD of "Query-Level Uncertainty in Large Language Models" (arXiv 2506.09669v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Such awareness enables models to per- form adaptive inference, such as invoking retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), engaging in slow and deep thinking, or abstaining from answering when appro- priate. In this work, we propose a method to detect knowledge boundaries viaQuery- Level Uncertainty, which estimates if a model is capable of answering a given querybeforegenerating any tokens, thus avoiding the generation cost. To this end, we propose a novel, training-free method calledInternal Confidence, which leverages self-evaluations across layers and tokens to provide a reliable signal of uncertainty. OurInternal Confidencemethod improves performance / running time tradeoffs in factu- ality assessment and RAG settings. In this work, we introduce the concept ofQuery-Level Uncertaintyto estimate a model’s knowledge with regard to a given query. The central research question here is:Given a query, can we deter- mine whether the model can address it before generating any tokens?Most existing work focuses on answer-level uncertainty, which measures the uncertainty associated with a specific answer and is commonly used to assess the reliability of model outputs (Shorinwa et al., 2024; Vashurin et al., 2025). In contrast, our approach shifts from post-generation to pre-generation, measuring how con- fidently an LLM can solve a given query, prior to answer generation, as illustrated in Figure 2. Another branch of work attempts to teach LLMs to explicitly express “I don’t know” in their responses via fine-tuning methods (Amayuelas et al., 2024; Kapoor et al., 2024; Cohen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). One common issue of these studies is that they require fine-tuning and training Query: To address this gap, we introduce a training-free approach to estimate query-level uncertainty that is both simple and effective. Our training-free and generation-free approach, termedInternal Confidence, leverages self- evaluation across internal layers and tokens. Inspired by the uncertainty measure P(TRUE)(Ka- davath et al., 2022), we prompt LLMs with a yes–no question to self-assess if they are capable of answering a given query, and define the probability assigned to the token YESas the confidence level, denoted as P(YES). To fully exploit the latent knowledge within LLMs, our improved Internal Confidence approach computes this sort of P(YES)at each layer and token position. This aggregation is motivated by prior work showing that leveraging logical consistency across layers can improve outputs (Burns et al., 2022; Chuang et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024). Concretely, we compute a weighted sum across layers and tokens, and the weights are derived from attenuated encoding (Chen et al., 2023), which enables fine-grained control of the influence of adjacent units. For fair comparison, we adapt existing answer-level methods to the query level. In terms of applications, we showcase that our proposed method can support efficient RAG and model cascading. In conclusion, we introduce the notion of query-level uncertainty and propose a simple yet effective training-free method to estimate it, which enables models to determine whether a query can be addressed without generating any tokens. Notably, these methods assesspost-generationreliability, i.e., uncertainty regarding a specific answer after it has been produced. For example, Gottesman & Geva (2024) propose training a lightweight probe on internal repre- sentations to estimate the model’s knowledge about specific entities. Similarly, Semantic Entropy Probes (Kossen et al., 2024) suggest that internal model states can implicitly encode semantic un- certainty, even before any output is generated. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to formally define query-level uncertainty and to investigate it systematically. (2022) explores whether language models can be trained to predict when they “know” the answer to a given query, introducing the concept of “I Know” (IK) prediction. Based on this idea, subsequent work has proposed methods to help LLMs become explicitly aware of their knowledge limitations through fine-tuning strategies (Amayuelas et al., 2024; Kapoor et al., 2024). In this work, we propose a training-free method to identify the knowledge boundary of an LLM, which offers a more efficient alternative that can be applied across models and tasks. 3 PROBLEMSTATEMENT ANDMETHOD In this section, we define the problem and introduce ourInternal Confidence, a training-free and generation-free uncertainty that reflects whether an LLM can address a query in its own knowledge, prior to generating tokens. We define a query as being within the model’s knowledge boundary if the LLM can produce a correct answer under greedy decoding, i.e., by selecting the highest- probability token at each step without sampling. (1) Efficiency – Our method treats a successful greedy decode as a signal that the model knows how to answer, which is a fast proxy. Following that, we can compute the 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 probability assigned to the token P(YES)at the last token (x N ): The probability P(YES)can serve as a query-level confidence score here, which is similar to the process of linear probing (Alain & Bengio, 2016), but without any training steps. Motivated by these insights, we propose theInternal Confidence, a method that leverages latent knowledge distributed across multiple layers and tokens. The hidden state for the tokenx n of the input query at layerlis computed as: ,h(l−1) n )(2) In total, the model containsN×Lsuch latent representations, and we can use Equation 1 to compute the P(YES)for eachh (l) n . In the first step, for each individual token, we compute a weighted sum of confidence scores across layers. Conceptually, this process can be parameterized by a layer weight vectorw layer ∈R L for the first step and a token weight vectorw token ∈R N for the second step. While, in principle, the optimal decision center may also lie elsewhere, identifying such an optimal center would require a hold-out set of training data, which conflicts with our goal of developing a training-free approach. Additionally, we compute the Expected Calibration Error (ECE) to assess the calibration of different methods. Finally, we note that the variants, P(YES)(top right) and P(YES)(naive avg), generally underperform the full method, which highlights the importance of the attenuated encoding and its decay weights in effectively aggregating signals