REAL METHOD of "Look-ahead Reasoning with a Learned Model in Imperfect Information Games" (arXiv 2510.05048v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Since players lack complete knowledge of the state of the game, theoretically sound look-ahead reasoning methods need to reason about the distribution 1 arXiv:2510.05048v1 [cs.AI] 6 Oct 2025 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 of all possible hidden states consistent with shared knowledge (Kovaˇr´ık et al., 2023), which differs from the MCTS used by MuZero. We introduce a training procedure to learn these components from sampled game trajectories. Look-ahead reasoningReasoning algorithms in imperfect information games, such as Counter- factual Regret Minimization (Zinkevich et al., 2007), iteratively improve player’s policies by sys- tematically iterating over all possible future action sequences in all possible (unobserved) states of the game. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2 BACKGROUND We define two-player zero-sum simultaneous move game asG= (N,W, w INIT,A,T,R,O) Kovaˇr´ık et al. O:w× A × W →Ois the observation function.O=O 0 ×O 1 ×O 2 is the set of joint public and private observations.Ocan be factored asO= (O 0,O 1,O 2), whereO 0 is a public part of observation andO 1,O 2 are private parts of observations for each player. al−1wl ∈(WA) ∗Wis a finite sequence of world states and actions, which starts in the initial world statew0 =w INIT and for each timestept∈ {0,· · ·, l−1}holdsat ∈ A(wt) andw t+1 =T(w t, at).His the set of all possible histories within the game. Each playeridoes not observe the whole world state at each timestep, but only observes public observationsO 0 and its private observationsO i. We will uses i ∈ Si to denote the set of all histories consistent with the observations of the playeri, which we will call the information set.S i is the set of all the information sets of the playeri.s i(h)is the information set that corresponds to historyh. Each public state contains one or more information sets for each player. We will sometimes useπ i(si, ai)as a probability that player will playa i in information sets i if it follows the strategyπ i.π= (π 1, π2)is a joint strat- egy profile of both players. This necessity arises because sound reasoning algorithms compute strategies for all players simultaneously, aiming for mutual best responses characteristic of an equilibrium. Given the latent representations for all players (s1, s2) and the joint action taken (a1, a2), this function pre- dicts the resulting next latent representations for both players, the immediate rewardr(e.g., for player 1), and a binary termination flagl. To satisfy the condition that each public state consists of at mostLinformation sets of each player, we split the representation function into two parts as shown in Figure 1. This represen- tative will then be used for training dynamicsΥ θ and legal actionsΓ θ. Si →R K, which will be trained to predict this clustering property for each abstract information set. Each training step, the simulator provides trajectoryh=w INITa0 . The training involves two additional losses, the first oneL A θ updates theΛ i,θ andκ θ using a soft clustering objective similar to fuzzy c-means Bezdek et al. The second lossL S θ updates theΛ I θ by minimizing the cross entropy loss between the predicted probability distribution over the abstract information sets and the one-hot encoded vector of the abstract information set that is the nearest neighbor of the real information set based on theκ. First theΛ i,θ predicts 4 abstract information sets and thenΛ I i,θ predicts the probability distribution over those abstractions. LM A θ =L M θ +L A θ +L S θ (4) The overall loss also includes the model learning loss from Section 3. Such value function may be trained even in our model, but it would require two-phase training process, where first phase trains the abstraction and second the value function. (2025), which results in an algorithm we callLearned Abstract Model for Imperfect-information Reasoning(LAMIR), which consists of the parts described in Sections 3 and 4 and these additional components: • Strategy functionπ θ :S i →∆A, which for given information set from the original game returns the strategy trained with some policy-gradient algorithm, like RNaD Perolat et al. • Transformations functionτ θ :S i →R |Ai|×|T| , representingTcharacteristic directions in strategy space explored by the policy-gradient algorithm during training. We used Regularized Nash Dynamics (RNaD) as the policy-gradient algorithm, which includes Neural Replicator Dynamics (NeuRD) loss for strategy training and mean squared error for the associated baseline value functionL P G θ Hennes et al. We use mean squared error for the training of the value functionL V θ and the targets are computed by the V-trace Espeholt et al. For each playeriwe compute the difference vectorδ t i =π t,NEW i −π t,OLD i , whereπ t,OLD i andπ t,NEW i are concatenated strategies along the whole trajectory before and after the training step. LT θ = X i∈N X χi∈T ||χi −δ t i ||2 e−γ||χi−δt i ||2 P χ′ i∈T e−γ||χ′ i−δt i ||2 (5) Since transformation loss depend on strategy changes after the step of policy-gradient training, we use a two-step update per episode. First we update the Policy-gradient algorithm and then all the other components of the model. The algorithm constructs the depth-limited game tree using the trained dynamics and legal actions functionsΥ θ,Γ θ. At the depth-limit in non-terminal states it adds additional decision layer withTactions for both players. 6 EXPERIMENTS 6.1 EXPLOITABILITY INSMALLERGAMES To ensure that the strategies found by LAMIR approximate Nash equilibria, we applied it in games small enough to compute exact exploitability, which serves as a distance from the Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games. In each public state, the algorithm uses the trained functions to construct the depth-limited subgame with depth limit 1. Then we compute the exploitability of the final composed strategy in the original game. Each choice ofκis capable of outperforming the concurrently trained RNaD with the same amount of training episodes given sufficientL. For each game andκ, we have trained LAMIR with 3 different random seeds for 3 million episodes. Then we matched each trained seed of LAMIR with each trained seed of RNaD and played more than 100,000 matches. Thus, for games that do not fall into the A-loss recall category after abstraction, theoretical conver- gence guarantees for CFR-based methods within LAMIR are not assured. First, we have proposed a method for learning the fun