REAL METHOD of "Textual Bayes: Quantifying Uncertainty in LLM-Based Systems" (arXiv 2506.10060v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Cresswell {brendan, noel, atiyeh, rasa, zhaoyan, amy, gloria, kk, gabriel, jesse}@layer6.ai ji.xin@uwaterloo.ca Layer 6 AI, Toronto, Canada ABSTRACT Although large language models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly capable of solving challenging real-world tasks, accurately quantifying their uncertainty re- mains a critical open problem—one that limits their applicability in high-stakes domains. To perform Bayesian in- ference—a difficult problem even for well-studied data modalities—we introduce Metropolis-Hastings through LLM Proposals (MHLP), a novel Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm that combines prompt optimization techniques with standard MCMC methods. Empir- ically, we demonstrate that our method yields improvements in both predictive accuracy and uncertainty quantification (UQ) on a range of LLM benchmarks and UQ tasks. Bayesian techniques have led to high-profile successes in methods like variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and Bayesian neural networks (Blundell et al., 2015). To implement our Bayesian approach, we proposeMetropolis-Hastings through LLM Proposals (MHLP), an MCMC algorithm to sample from intractable distributions over textual variables. We systematically evaluate our method through standard LLM benchmarks and baselines, show- ing that it improves performance while providing state-of-the-art UQ over model outputs. First, we encode our prior uncertainty (beliefs) about the true value ofθas aprior distributionp(θ). 2.3 MARKOVCHAINMONTECARLO AND THEMETROPOLIS-HASTINGSALGORITHM In Bayesian statistics, MCMC algorithms are a common technique for tractably sampling from the posteriorp(θ| D)when only its numerator in Eq. Given an unnormalized density likeg(θ), an MCMC algorithm is a general-purpose technique that specifies a Markov chain θ(1), θ(2), . Algorithm 1:Metropolis-Hastings Require:θ (0),q(θ ′ |θ),g(θ); fort←1toTdo Sample proposal:θ ′ ∼q(θ ′ |θ (t−1)); Compute acceptance probability: u∼Uniform(0,1); ifu < γthen Accept:θ (t) ←θ ′; else Reject:θ (t) ←θ (t−1); return{θ (t)}T t=1; TheMetropolis-Hastingsalgorithm (MH) is a generic and broadly applicable form of MCMC (for an introduction, see Robert (2015)). However, the choice ofqhas a pronounced ef- fect on the practicality of the algorithm, with poor choices (e.g., ones that perturbθtoo mildly or too strongly at each step) taking an intractable amount of time to converge to the limiting distributionp(θ| D). Our method, MHLP, will also fall into this category, being specialized for textual parametersθ. 3 TEXTUALBAYES In this section, we describe our method for Bayesian inference on LLM-based systems. By analogy to numerical losses in standard gradient-based optimization, TextGrad 1Some prompt optimization methods, such as the momentum variant of TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2025), make updates based on a history of multiple pastθvalues. MHLP can take advantage of such methods by running multiple steps of the optimizer per accept/reject decision, akin to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Method summaryWe define MHLP as the variant of MH (Alg. Given an inputxnew, we can generate a set of samples{y (r) new}m r=1 ∼p(y new |x new)via θ(r) ∼p(θ| D), y (r) new ∼p(y new |x new, θ(r));(8) that is, by runningy (r) new =LBS(x new;θ (r))for each sampled promptθ (r). 4.1, we demonstrate that our method outperforms comparable baselines in accuracy, calibration, and abstention capabilities on challenging LLM benchmarks. BaselinesWe compare our method against four frequentist baselines.ParaphrasingandSystem- Messageare two prompt perturbation methods proposed by Gao et al. 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 LBS(x;θ (0)), and(ii)TextGrad refers to first performingTsteps of prompt optimization and then samplingmpredictions fromLBS(x;θ (T) ). Because ours is a method for step(i), our baselines are methods designed specifically to do the same. This means we omit direct comparison to means of performing step(ii)such as semantic entropy (Kuhn et al., 2023) and other methods described in Sec. Although these are also UQ methods, they are orthogonal to our approach, and can be straightforwardly combined (for an example, see App. We use these instances to assess our method’s ability to detect insufficient information and abstain from answering. Our method (MHLP frequency scoring)Like GPT-4 frequency scoring, our method estimates a claim’s importance based on its frequency across alternative generations. ResultsFirst, we verify that both scoring methods achieve the target coverage from Eq. Our method consistently achieves lower removal, showing that MHLP scoring provides a better uncertainty estimation of the factuality of LLM outputs.4 3Filtering out all claims guarantees thatˆydoes not contain false claims, but does not give a useful answer. their method is applied to machine translation and not to UQ, they do not perform Bayesian inference, and their proposal is completely different and does not rely on prompt optimization methods. To implement this framework, we propose Metropolis-Hastings through LLM Proposals (MHLP), a novel MCMC algorithm for free-form text which finds applica- tions in Bayesian inference and beyond. This cost might be addressed, for example, by further engineering the underlying prompt optimization method or training a small language model specifically for the task of generating proposals. Second, like many practical ap- plications of Bayesian inference, our method requires approximations, which will inevitably cause deviations from the true posterior. Identifier-aware unified pre- trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. Training sets are often large enough to make running a full pass per MCMC step intractable. The TextGrad optimizer.STEP()method then incorporates this feedback to build a new parameter setθ ′. A.1, we need only compute logits from the final call optimizer.STEP, and so we always compute this step with an open-source LLM (Llama-3.1-Nemotron-70B-Instruct-HF (Wang et al., 2025; Bercovich et al., 2025)). We ensurem= 10final answers are sampled for each method. The second example represents a case where the LLM appears truly to not know the answer; our method quantifies uncertainty better by expressing much lower confidence (40%) than the TextGrad baseline. Counts per semantic cluster for TextGrad and our method Semantic Cluster TextGrad Ours 5q14.1 3 7 5q14.3 3 0 5 1 1 15q14 1 0 21q22 1 0 3q26 1 0 5q13 0 1 5q35 0 1 20 Published as a conference 