REAL METHOD of "Learning Exposure Mapping Functions for Inferring Heterogeneous Peer Effects" (arXiv 2503.01722v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

LEARNINGEXPOSUREMAPPINGFUNCTIONS FORINFERRINGHETEROGENEOUSPEEREFFECTS Shishir Adhikari, Sourav Medya, Elena Zheleva Department of Computer Science University of Illinois Chicago Chicago, IL, USA {sadhik9, medya, ezheleva}@uic.edu ABSTRACT Peer effect refers to the difference in counterfactual outcomes for a unit resulting from different levels of peer exposure, the extent to which the unit is exposed to the treatments, actions, or behaviors of its peers. Our evaluation on synthetic and semi-synthetic network data shows that our method is more robust to different unknown underlying influence mechanisms when compared to state-of-the-art baselines. Peer exposure has also been modeled with counts of different causal network motifs, i.e., recurrent subgraphs in a unit’s peer network with treatment assignments as attributes (Yuan et al., 2021). We propose EGONETGNN, a novel graph neural network (GNN) architecture, that automatically learns a relevant exposure mapping function under appropriate identifiability assumptions. However, these works use off-the-shelf GNNs like GCN (Kipf and Welling, 2016) or GIN (Xu et al., 2018) and prior work (Chen et al., 2020) has shown such architectures lack expressiveness for counting subgraphs with cycles and for capturing mechanisms involving local neighborhood structure. On the other hand, counts of such subgraphs, like causal network motifs, are rich features for capturing local structural contexts (Yuan et al., 2021), but they are expensive to compute, inflexible, and may not capture every local structural context (e.g., edge weights). We design this component to excel in counting attributed subgraphs, such as causal network motifs, enhancing its expressiveness to capture unknown underlying peer exposure mechanisms. EGONETGNNextracts ego networks, for each node vi, with peer treatments along with feature embedding and its edge attributes as node attributes. Then, node-level aggregations are performed to capture local neighborhood contexts. These contexts are passed through a masked weight layer and encoded by an multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to learn relevant influence mechanisms and summarized with graph-level aggregation. The graph transformation ensures expressiveness, while balance, coverage, entropy, and sparsity losses promote the robustness of the peer exposure representation. Let t=<t 1, ...,ti, ...,tn > be a random variable comprising the treatment variables ti for each node vi ∈ Vin the network and yi be a random variable for vi’s outcome. Let π=< π1, ..., πi, ..., πn > be an assignment to t with πi ∈ {0,1}assigned to ti. Let t−i =t\t i and π−i =π\π i denote random variable and its value for treatment assignment to other units exceptv i, which we refer to as peer treatments for convenience. 3.1 Architecture of EGONETGNN EGONETGNNfirst maps the attributed network to feature embedding using a MPGNN and extracts ego networks for each node vi, incorporating peer treatments, node features, and edge attributes. Feature encoder module takes relevant peer feature embeddings and the distance between ego and peer feature embeddings, i.e.,cij = Θf eat(cj||(ci−cj)2), to capture peer influence mechanisms involving peer attributes and feature similarity between ego and peers. The node aggregation for each node vj in the ego network ¯Gi considers neighbors’ node attributes ¯Xk, feature encodingc ik, edge attributesZ jk, and peer treatmentst k, and is defined forl th layer as follows: Masked weights promotes representation that is invariant to irrelevant contexts and feeds the concatenation of node attributes and hidden state after L layers of node aggregation, i.e., hagg j = ¯Xj||cij||hL j , through amasked fully connectedlayer as follows: The first aggregation captures proportion similar to the fraction of treated peers, but we weight each peer by hexp j /P j hexp j learned by the preceding layer. For the end-to-end learning of ˆϕe, ˆϕf , and ˆfYi, we introduce three custom loss functions designed for EGONETGNN: Entropy loss encourages mask weights, i.e., p:=σ(W mask) to take values toward 0 or 1 and sparsity loss pushes for a few weights with high values. Formally, we define entropy loss and sparsity loss as Lent =mean(−plog(p)−(1−p)log(1−p))andL sp =mean(p). In contrast, our method is expressive to capture relevant causal network motifs. Our analysis of runtime complexity included in Appendix A.4.3 shows our method is, roughly on average, ρE ×avg(d) times more computationally expensive than standard MPGNNs, where ρE is the average edge density andavg(d)is the average degree. Our method shows robust performance across different underlying peer influence mechanisms and edge densities (low to high). Mean and standard deviation HPE estimation error (ϵP EHEmetric) for three variants of our method (original, without mask, and without feature encoder and mask) in the BlogCatalog (BC), Barabasi Albert (BA), and Watts Strogatz (WS) datasets for three true peer exposure mechanisms. The results for the learned peer exposure representation by our method is better (higher is better). However, with increased edge density and more complex network topology, unlike our method, the baselines are not sufficiently expressive to capture underlying mechanisms and suffer significantly. Figure 3 and other results in Appendix A.7 show that for unknown peer exposure mechanisms, our method is as expressive as or superior to the strongest baseline with significantly better performance for denser networks. In this setup, peer effects are heterogeneous due to the interaction of peer exposure conditions and effect modifiers, and our method is able to approximate it better than the baselines. If we assume such interference is mediated via immediate neighbors, then we could model it by stacking multiple exposure mapping function learning layers, where the subsequent layers would summarize the exposures of neighbors. In Appendix A.8 (Table 6), our experiments with a randomly augmented network show that the performance does not degrade significantly for our method with the removal of edges. To obtain the hidden state at the lth layer, a local aggregation of the previous layer’s hidden states (hl−1 j and hl−1 i ) and, optionally, edge attributes Zij is performed and then combined with hl−1 i . Typically, in various GNN architectures, the update and aggregation functions are chosen as part of architecture design. Without loss of generality, assume node attributes for each nodev i are<