REAL METHOD of "Transitive RL: Value Learning via Divide and Conquer" (arXiv 2510.22512v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

VALUELEARNING VIADIVIDE ANDCONQUER Seohong Park∗1 Aditya Oberai∗1 Pranav Atreya1 Sergey Levine1 1University of California, Berkeley {seohong, aoberai}@berkeley.edu ABSTRACT In this work, we present Transitive Reinforcement Learning (TRL), a new value learning algorithm based on a divide-and-conquer paradigm. TRL is designed for offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) problems, where the aim is to find a policy that can reach any state from any other state in the smallest number of steps. Compared to temporal differ- ence (TD) methods, TRL suffers less from bias accumulation, as in principle it only requiresO(logT)recursions (as opposed toO(T)in TD learning) to han- dle a length-Ttrajectory. Unlike Monte Carlo methods, TRL suffers less from high variance as it performs dynamic programming. Experimentally, we show that TRL achieves the best performance in highly challenging, long-horizon bench- mark tasks compared to previous offline GCRL algorithms. Blog post:https://seohong.me/blog/rl-without-td-learning # RecursionsTDTD-nDivide &Conquer 1 T − 1 O(T) O(T /n ) O(log T) n T − n T/ 2 T/ 2 Horizon DecompositionMethod Figure 1:Transitive RL.Transitive RL is based on the divide-and-conquer paradigm, which can in theory reduce the number of Bellman recursions toO(logT)in the best case, unlike TD-based methods. In off-policy RL, we typically train a value function using (some variant of) temporal differ- ence (TD) learning with Bellman backups,Q(s, a)←r(s, a) +γmax a′ ¯Q(s′, a′), and train a pol- icy to maximize the learned value function. A standard technique to mitigate this bias accumulation issue in practice is to mix Monte Carlo (MC) returns, either for short-horizon trajectory chunks (e.g.,n-step returns) or even for full trajectories (e.g., purely MC-based approaches). Sometimes, it is possible to strike a balance in the bias-variance tradeoff usingn-step returns with an appropriately tuned ∗Equal contribution. We also need to carefully tunenfor each task, and it requires optimality in length-ntrajectory chunks. Is there an “ideal” off-policy RL method that scales to arbitrarily long-horizon tasks, being free from the curse of horizon? Our main hypothesis in this work is that adivide-and-conqueralgorithm might provide a path to an answer. By divide-and-conquer, we mean an algorithm that incrementally learns values by combining two equal-sized trajectory segments into a larger one. In principle, such an algorithm might be able tologarithmicallyreduce the number of biased recursions, unlike TD- based methods, while not suffering from high variance, unlike MC-based methods (Figure 1). As an initial step to verify this hypothesis, we focus on an important subset of RL problems, offline goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) (Kaelbling, 1993; Park et al., 2025a), which provides a structure that is naturally amenable to divide and conquer. Goal-conditioned RL aims to find a policy that can reach any state from any other state in the smallest number of steps. By its shortest-path-like nature, it satisfies a triangle inequality, which we can exploit to develop a divide-and-conquer algorithm. In this work, we propose a new divide-and-conquer-based offline goal-conditioned RL algorithm, Transitive RL (TRL), for long-horizon goal-reaching tasks. Empirically, we show that TRL often exhibits better performance than previous TD- and MC-based approaches on highly complex, long-horizon robotics tasks over1000environment steps. To the best of our knowledge, TRL is the first divide-and-conquer value learning method that scales to long-horizon robotic tasks beyond toy domains. In this work, we pro- pose a new goal-conditioned RL algorithm based on a triangle inequality, as discussed in the next paragraph. The idea of using the triangle inequality dates back to the very first work in goal-conditioned RL by Kaelbling (1993). Since then, several prior works have leveraged this structure in three main ways. Among planning-free off-policy RL methods, while hard approaches have proven effective in prac- tice so far (e.g., QRL (Wang et al., 2023)), soft approaches (to our knowledge) have not yet scaled beyond2-D toy environments in the absence of additional planning (Kaelbling, 1993; Dhiman et al., 2018; Jurgenson et al., 2020; Piekos et al., 2023). Our method, TRL, is based on the soft triangle inequality;i.e., we use the triangle inequality for value backups, instead of hard quasimetric constraints. We assume that we are given an unlabeled datasetD={τ (i)}i consisting of length-Treward-free trajectoriesτ= (s 0, a0, s1, . 3.1 PREVIOUSAPPROACHES TOOFFLINEGCRL An offline RL algorithm typically consists of two components: Policy extraction.After learning a goal-conditioned value function, the next step is to train a policy to maximize the learned values. If we initialize the value function withV(s, g)≤0for alls, g∈ S, a standard result in computer science (e.g., the Floyd-Warshall algorithm) implies that repeatedly applying this operator converges to the optimal value functionV ∗(s, g)(Dhiman et al., 2018; Piekos et al., 2023). 4.3 PRACTICALRECIPE Based on the high-level idea in Section 4.2, we now describe the full recipe of our method, which we callTransitive RL (TRL). To this end, we weigh the loss for each sample(s i, sj)in the batch byw(s i, sj) := 1/(1 + logγ Q(si, ai, sj))λ, whereλis a hyperparameter. Our first goal is to see whether TRL’s divide-and-conquer value learning algorithm exhibits better scalability tolong-horizonprob- lems than more standard approaches (TD,n-step TD, and MC) in practice. To conduct a controlled experiment that solely focuses on the value update rules, we fix the other hyperparameters,e.g., goal hindsight relabeling ratios and policy extraction methods, except for the BC coefficientαin DDPG+BC (Equation (4)), which we individually tune for each method and task. We consider four methods considered in the work by Park et al. 5.2 HOW DOESTRLCOMPARE TO PRIOR METHODS ON STANDARD BENCHMARKS? Next, we compare the performance of TRL with existing offline GCRL algorithms on OG- Bench (Park et al., 2025a), a standard benchmark in offline goal-conditioned RL. Methods.We consider five widely used offline GCRL methods in this section: 0 1M Steps 0 50 100Performance hummaze-medium random in-traj 0 1M Steps 0 50 100 scene-play random in-traj 0 1M Steps 0 50 100 puzzle-4x4 random in-traj Figure 6:Ablation study on subgoal distributions. namely, adivide- and-conquervalue learning algor