REAL METHOD of "COMI: Coarse-to-fine Context Compression via Marginal Information Gain" (arXiv 2602.01719v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Con- text compression methods address these challenges by significantly reducing input length and eliminating redundancy. We proposeCOMI, a coarse-to-fine adaptive context compression framework that jointly optimizes for semantic relevance and diversity under high compression rates. We introduceMarginal Information Gain (MIG), a metric defined as the relevance of a unit to the input query minus its semantic redundancy with other units, guiding the compression process to prior- itize information that is both relevant and low redundant. (1)Coarse-Grained Group Reallocation, where the context is partitioned into groups and dynamically assigned compression rates based on inter-group MIG, ensuring compression budgets align with information value dis- tribution; and (2)Fine-Grained Token Merging, where tokens within each group are fused via an intra-group MIG-based weighting mechanism, thereby preserving key semantics while avoiding the accumulation of redundancy. Extensive experi- ments across question-answering (e.g., NaturalQuestions, 2WikiMQA, HotpotQA and NarrativeQA), summarization (e.g., MultiNews) with various backbones (e.g., LLaMA-2-7B, Qwen2-7B) show that COMI outperforms existing baselines by a large margin,e.g., approximately 25-point Exact Match (EM) improvement under 32x compression constraint with Qwen2-7B on NaturalQuestions1. However, recent advances in prompting techniques, such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), inevitably increase input length, introducing two key challenges when deploying LLMs in long context scenarios: (1) computational cost, as the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) leads to inefficiency with long sequences; and (2) information redundancy, where the presence of redundant content degrades model performance (Jiang et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Tang et al., 2025a;b). Existing prompt com- pression methods mainly fall into two categories: LLMs typically allocate attention to only a small subset of ∗Corresponding authors 1The code will be available athttps://github.com/Twilightaaa/COMI 1 arXiv:2602.01719v3 [cs.CL] 6 Mar 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 query-relevant tokens (see Figure 1a). Consequently, task-agnostic methods that compress context without considering the input query inevitably lose or dilute relevant information, especially at high compression rates. 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 T op Percentage of Query-Related T okens (%) 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 T otal Attention Contribution (%) (a) Attention Weight Contribution. Analysis of Attention Distribution and Similarity of Top Query-Related Tokens. (a) Only a small number of tokens related to the query occupy a large proportion of the attention weight allocation; for example, the 0.75% most relevant tokens occupy 99% of the attention weights. In contrast, task-aware methods generally include query in the compression process, preserving information according to relevance via query-guided strategies such as merging, deletion or sum- marization. However, existing task-aware methods rely solely on relevance as a criterion for com- pression, ignoring the inherent redundancy in natural language (Shannon, 1948). they either follow predefined linear rules lacking adaptability (Jiang et al., 2023; 2024; Tang et al., 2025a), rely on model-internal under- standing (Chen et al., 2025) (i.e., task-agnostic) that may ignore query-relevant content, or determine compression rates based solely on relevance (Cao et al., 2024) (i.e., assigning lower compression to high relevance content). None of these methods account for semantic redundancy among compres- sion units, leading to repeated retention of similar information and compromising both compression effectiveness and information diversity. This naturally raises a research question:How can we retain query-relevant information while identifying and eliminating semantic redundancy among compressed representations, especially under high compression rates, to jointly optimize relevance and diversity? To this end, we proposeCOMI(COarse-to-fine Context Compression viaMarginalInformation Gain), a coarse-to-fine context compression framework that adaptively balances relevance informa- tion preservation and redundancy elimination. We introduceMarginal Information Gain (MIG), which is defined as the relevance of a unit to the query minus its semantic redundancy with other units. In the first stage,Coarse-grained Group Reallocation, the input context is divided into segments of equal length, each treated as a compression group. MIG is com- puted for inter-group, and the compression rate for each group is dynamically adjusted accordingly: groups with high MIG (i.e., high relevance and low redundancy) are assigned lower compression rates. (1) We introduce Marginal Information Gain (MIG) as a metric for context compression, jointly modeling task relevance and semantic redundancy. This overcomes the limitations of existing relevance-only methods and provides a more discriminative framework for evaluating information value in long context compression. (2) We propose COMI, which em- ploys a coarse-to-fine adaptive compression strategy. Experimental results demonstrate that COMI outper- forms existing methods by a large margin under high compression rates,e.g., with a 32x compres- sion constraint and using Qwen2-7B as the backbone, COMI improves the Exact Match (EM) score by approximately 25-point over suboptimal baseline on NaturalQuestions. GMSA GMSA (Tang et al., 2025b) introduces an issue of cross-layer semantic misalignment in the encoder- decoder based framework and addresses it via Layer Semantic Alignment (LSA), which aligns high- level summary vectors with low-level original input semantics, thereby bridging the semantic gap across different layers. Since COMI also relies on an encoder-decoder framework, we similarly em- ploy LSA to achieve cross-layer semantic alignment (see Figure 2). 3 RELATEDWORK Task-Agnostic Context Compression Methods.Task-agnostic context compression methods typically do not incorporate the input query and aim to preserve overall semantic information for broad downstream applicability. Task-Aware Context Compression Methods.Task-aware context compression methods do not pursue the completeness of semantic over the compressed representation, but focus on retaining information relevant to downstream task. The original