REAL METHOD of "Forest-Based Graph Learning for Semi-Supervised Node Classification" (arXiv 2001.06137v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To this end, we propose a Graph Inference Learning (GIL) framework to boost the performance of semi- supervised node classiﬁcation by learning the inference of node labels on graph topology. For learning the inference process, we further introduce meta-optimization on structure relations from training nodes to validation nodes, such that the learnt graph inference capability can be better self-adapted to testing nodes. Comprehensive evaluations on four benchmark datasets (including Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, and NELL) demonstrate the superiority of our proposed GIL when compared against state-of-the-art methods on the semi-supervised node classiﬁcation task. Given a graph in which some nodes are labeled, the aim of semi-supervised classiﬁcation is to infer the categories of those remaining unlabeled nodes by using various priors of the graph. Although graph CNN based methods have achieved considerable capabilities of graph embedding by optimizing ﬁlters, they are limited into a conventionally semi-supervised framework and lack of an efﬁcient inference mechanism on graphs. Especially, in the case of few-shot learning, where a small number of training nodes are labeled, this kind of methods would drastically compromise the performance. Speciﬁcally, the local structures as well as node attributes are encoded as high-level features with graph convolution, while the between-node path reachability is abstracted as reachable probabilities of random walks. To better make the inference generalize to test nodes, we introduce a meta-learning strategy to optimize the structure relations learning from training nodes to validation nodes. These aforementioned works usually boil down to a general classiﬁcation task, where the model is learnt on a training set and selected by checking a validation set. In this paper, we propose a graph inference learning (GIL) framework to teach the model itself to adaptively infer from reference labeled nodes to those query unlabeled nodes, and ﬁnally boost the performance of semi-supervised node classiﬁcation in the case of a few number of labeled samples. Given an input graph, GIL attempts to infer the unlabeled nodes from those observed nodes by building between-node relations. The local structures anchored around each node as well as the attributes of nodes therein are jointly encoded with graph convolution (Defferrard et al., 2016) for the sake of high-level feature extraction. For the between-node path reachability, we adopt the random walk algorithm to obtain the characteristics from a labeled reference node vi to a query unlabeled node vj in a given graph. • To make the inference model better generalize to test nodes, we introduce a meta-learning procedure to optimize structure relations, which could be the ﬁrst time for graph node classiﬁcation to the best of our knowledge. Speciﬁcally, spectral ﬁltering methods (Henaff et al., 2015; Kipf & Welling, 2017) develop convolution-like operators in the spectral domain, and then perform a series of spectral ﬁlters by decomposing the graph Laplacian. To alleviate this computation burden, local spectral ﬁltering methods (Defferrard et al., 2016) are then proposed by parameterizing the frequency responses as a Chebyshev polynomial approximation. Several classic algorithms with graph Laplacian regularization contain the label propagation method using Gaussian random ﬁelds (Zhu et al., 2003), the regularization framework by relying on the local/global consistency (Zhou et al., 2004), and the random walk- based sampling algorithm for acquiring the context information (Yang et al., 2016). Several graph convolution network methods (Abu-El-Haija et al., 2018; Du et al., 2017; Thekumparampil et al., 2018; Velickovic et al., 2018; Zhuang & Ma, 2018) are then developed to obtain discriminative representations of input graphs. Graph attention networks (GAT) (Velickovic et al., 2018) are proposed to compute hidden representations of each node for attending to its neighbors with a self-attention strategy. A sophisticated machine learning technique used in most existing methods (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Zhou et al., 2004) is to choose the optimal classiﬁer (trained on a training set) after checking the performance on the validation set. In semi-supervised node classiﬁcation, we take the training node setVtr as the reference samples, and the validation setVval as the query samples during the training stage. Given a training setVtr, we expect that the best performance can be obtained on the validation set Vval after optimizing the model onVtr. Given a trained/pretrained model Θ ={fe,φw,φr}, we perform iteratively gradient updates on the training setVtr to obtain the new model, formally, Θ′ = Θ−α∇ΘLtr(Θ), (6) whereα is the updating rate. During the training process, we may perform batch sampling from training nodes and validation nodes, instead of taking all one time. This fact is easily exhibited by considering at-step path from vertexvi to vertexvj as ﬁrst taking a single step to some vertexh, and then takingt− 1 steps tovj. The transition probability Pt int steps can be formulated as Pt ij =    Pij if t = 1 ∑ h PihPt−1 h,j if t> 1, (8) where each matrix entryPt ij denotes the probability of starting at vertexi and ending at vertexj int steps. Taking into account the graph convolution and pooling modules, we may alternately stack them into a multi-layer Graph convolutional network. The GIL model consists of two graph convolution layers, each of which is followed by a mean-pooling layer, a class-to-node relationship regression module, and a ﬁnal softmax layer. We pre-train our proposed GIL model for 200 iterations with the training set, where its initial learning rate, decay factor, and momentum are set to 0.05, 0.95, and 0.9, respectively. Here we train the GIL model using the stochastic gradient descent method with the batch size of 100. Our proposed GIL can signiﬁcantly outperform these graph Laplacian regularized methods on four graph datasets, including Deep walk (Zhou et al., 2004), modularity clustering (Brandes et al., 2008), Gaussian ﬁelds (Zhu et al., 2003), and graph embedding (Yang et al., 2016) methods. We further compare our proposed GIL with several existing deep graph embedding methods, including graph attention network (Velickovic et al., 2018), dual graph convolutional networks (Zhuang & Ma, 2018), topology adaptive graph convolutional networks (Du et al., 2017), Multi-scale graph convolution (Abu-El-Haija et a