REAL METHOD of "What Happens Next? Anticipating Future Motion by Generating Point Trajectories" (arXiv 2509.21592v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To better contrast video and track generators, we minimize the difference between architectures and compare a trajectory forecaster trained from scratch to video generators trained on billions of videos. (2024) introduced a training-free method that leverages Motion-I2V (Shi et al., 2024), a pre-trained image-to-flow model, to discover potential object motion within a given image. first predicting future optical flow maps from a static image, then translating these flow maps into RGB frames. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 SolveTrajectory Latents Trajectory Latents Decoder Encoder Image I Query Points Latent Flow Field Figure 2:Method overview. The model is trained with a β-V AE objective (Higgins et al., 2017), using a Huber loss Lδ for reconstruction and a KL divergence to regularize the Gaussian code posterior Nϕ(x|I) with respect to the normal distributionN 0. These encoded trajectories are then patchified with a non-overlapping 2D convolution with kernel size r and stride r, which 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 outputs the number of channels matching our model embedding dimension. This representation is then processed with a spatio-temporal transformer decoder, matching the encoder. Here, z0 ∼ N(0, I)is a normal sample, (z1,I) is a training sample, and t∼Uniform[0,1] is a random time step. At test time, we draw samples from the target distribution p(z|I) by first sampling z0 ∼ N(0, I)from the normal distribution and then moving it towards z=z 1 along the path defined by the velocity field ˆv(zt,I, t), which amounts to integrating an ODE. 3.3 TRAINING During training, onlyone ground truth futureis observedfor each initial condition, which reflects the setting where real data provides only one ground truth future. To compute this, we simulate K possible trajectories for each image I (randomizing the initial velocities) and compare them to K generated trajectories x. 4 EXPERIMENTS In this section, we begin by comparing our method with regression-based baselines to highlight the effectiveness of combining stochastic trajectory generation with grid-based global scene reasoning. We show that our method surpasses a generative trajectory baseline, underscoring the advantages of our proposed architecture. 4.1 COMPARISON WITHREGRESSIONMETHODS We compare our method with ATM (Wen et al., 2024a) and Tra-MoE (Yang et al., 2025), regression- based trajectory predictors, using the LIBERO robotics datasets. Since ATM and Tra-MoE regress trajectories from the initial frame and a text instruction, we extend our method with text conditioning, using the same BERT model to process text as the baselines. In contrast, our method directly predicts trajectories at every other pixel, which include evaluation points as a subset. To fairly compare with regression baselines, we compute results for our method in three ways: Min Compute metric for eachksamples, taking the minimum of the results. 3), where our method can sample diverse yet consistent predictions. Further, in Table 14, we show that the same conclusions hold when we train our method on pseudo ground truth trajectories from CoTracker3. Table 4 shows that our method performs favourably in this setting as well, though all methods show increased metrics, indicating slightly affected performance out-of-distribution. Then, we train a specialized V AE that encodes 32×32 trajectory grids conditioned on 128×128 images. To- gether, these datasets allow us to examine a broader range of physical phenomena and interactions while assessing our method’s performance on motion forecasting under unconstrained, real-world conditions. Model MeanT Mean Min Track2Act 7037.88 9305.63 4393.58 W AN (1.3B) 2650.59 3495.43 1799.04 Ours (L) 1475.68 1565.06 1240.6 Finally, in Section A.4, we present a qualitative study to showcase our method’s ability to generalize from synthetic training data from Physion (Bear et al., 2022) to real-world scenes that we recorded. To demonstrate this, here we train and evaluate a multi-frame version of our method on Kubric. conditioned on 1 input frame conditioned on 2 input frames First sample Second sample Third sample First two GT steps Input F rames First two sampled steps Figure 5:Initial steps of samples with varying number of input frames.Input frames and the corresponding ground truth future rollout are shown alongside generated samples with different random seeds. Instead, we investigate whether our method can be trained on more diverse synthetic data and still be effective in generalizing to real-world scenarios. Our method can generate the motion of both rigid and non-rigid objects (last three rows), model force propagation (first and second row), and integrate multiple physical phenomena with different material properties (third row and forth row). Nevertheless, our method performs comparably or better than the strongest alternative method. For each configuration, we train a separate V AE using a shared architecture and hyperparameters, varying only the input size (sampling density). We then train separate denoising models using thebasenetwork architecture, following the input modality ablation (Section 4.3). 28 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 C IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS C.1 SHAREDARCHITECTURE The encoder ϕ, decoder ψ, and denoiser v are all based on variants of the same architecture, derived fromLatteMa et al. Each block thus consists of self-attention (applied only to trajectory tokens), cross-attention (where trajectory tokens serve as queries and image tokens as keys/values), and a pointwise MLP. The overall architecture of each component in our method is illustrated in Fig. Inspatial attention, the attention mechanism operates across trajectory tokens at a fixed timestep. (2025) usefull attention(i.e., attention along both spatial and temporal axes), we apply the above-describedfactorized attentiondue to the quadratic computational cost offullattention. Each block thus consists of self-attention (applied only to trajectory tokens), cross-attention (where trajectory tokens serve as queries and image tokens as keys/values), and a pointwise MLP. The resulting cross-attention output is then combined with the previously computed features through a learnable additive gating. (2025) and DiT Peebles & Xie (2023), we encode the timestep using sinusoidal positional encoding, followed by a multilayer perceptron (MLP). Note that training our method (L) takes 8.5 days = 204 GPU hours, implyi