REAL METHOD of "Scaling up Memory for Robotic Control via Experience Retrieval" (arXiv 2510.20328v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

SCALINGUPMEMORY FORROBOT CONTROL VIAEXPERIENCERETRIEVAL Ajay Sridhar∗ Jennifer Pan∗ Satvik Sharma Chelsea Finn Stanford University {ajaysri, jrpan}@stanford.edu ABSTRACT Humans routinely rely on memory to perform tasks, yet most robot policies lack this capability; our goal is to endow robot policies with the same abil- ity. We propose a hierarchical policy framework, where the high-level policy is trained to select and track pre- vious relevant keyframes from its experience. Our approach, MemER, outperforms prior methods on three real-world long-horizon robotic manipula- tion tasks that require minutes of memory. The ability to form and retrieve memories is a crucial step towards robots solving complex, multi-step tasks. Because conditioning on long sequences of high-dimensional image and video sequences is compu- tationally expensive, many existing generalist end-to-end policies are trained with little to no visual history. The high memory cost makes training prohibitively expensive and model deployment un- usably slow. The suboptimal policy will generate histories that differ from those seen by the expert, which is only made worse as the observation history lengthens. Some past works have shown it is possible to expand the observation context of their policy via auxiliary losses (Torne et al., 2025), or by finetuning pretrained foundation models for action pre- diction with native memory capabilities (Fang et al., 2025). Although these methods significantly increase the types of tasks a robot can execute, they are challenging to naively scale to long histories. MemER is able to utilize task-relevant past information to effectively reason through three complex long-horizon tasks, using a single policy trained with only a small number of expert demon- strations. To this end, we propose approaching long-term memory for robotic policies with a hierarchical framework. The high-level policy is a finetuned video-understanding VLM trained to output sub- tasks and, most importantly, to select keyframes from its fixed recent context that represent impor- tant information it will need to remember to solve the task. However, these are at most theN= 10most recent frames of context, while our method can choose to include task-relevant frames spanning the entire episode, which could contain over a thousand frames. These methods are not directly applicable for robotic tasks because increasing video context lengths would not meet the task’s latency constraint during inference. Designed for real-world robotics, our method emphasizes low- cost inference and streaming support. at+H−1 ]is a chunk of actions modeled from the current timestept, up toHtimesteps in the future (Zhao et al., 2023) ando t is the robot’s current sensor observation. In other words, a robot policy trained to modelπ(A t|ot)could not complete the task, but a policy trained to model π(At|o0:t)could. In our method, the high-level policy will be responsible for reasoning about memory. 3.2 HIGH-LEVELPOLICY Our method builds on the common hierarchical VLA paradigm, as in Shi et al. By timestept, the high-level policy has given us J ′ 0:t = (Ji)t i=0, the sequence of candidate sets nominated up to timestept. 3.3 PRACTICALIMPLEMENTATION OFMEMER Training the Low-Level Policy.For our low-level robot policy, we finetune a version ofπ 0.5 (Intelligence et al., 2025) trained on the DROID dataset (Khazatsky et al., 2025). We freeze the weights of the vision encoder and projection layer during finetuning for training efficiency. Refer to Appendix A for the specific training parameters and Appendix F for format of the training prompts. Annotating Keyframes for the High-Level Policy.To label keyframes for each task, we employ a semi-automatic annotation procedure. However, training the high-level policy to accurately predict the language subtasks used by the low-level policy requires roughly 5,000 gradient steps (10–15 epochs). Concurrent work suggests that linearly interpolating the weights of a generalist pretrained model with those of the same model finetuned on narrow, task-specific data can help preserve the pretrained model’s robustness and generalization, while still allowing adaptation to the new task (Anonymous, 2025). 4 EXPERIMENTS In this section, we aim to evaluate the extent to which our method and alternative approaches can tackle long-horizon manipulation tasks that require memory. We first describe our tasks and evalua- tion protocols, then discuss the following questions: How does representing memory via images compare to other modalities? We design three complex, real-robot tasks that entail using memory in multiple distinct ways, in- cluding remembering object locations, keeping track of previously completed actions, and counting repeated steps, as illustrated in Fig. Then, the robot is sequentially given three objects to find; each new instruction is issued only after the robot has attempted to retrieve the previous object. We train and test with the same set of 15 objects, which are various small toys (see Figure 9 in Appendix C).Evaluation metric.We measure task completion by two criteria for each of the three objects: We train and test with peanuts and jelly beans (see Figure 9 in Appendix C).Evaluation metric.Task completion is measured by the absolute value of the difference between the number of scoops requested and obtained for each ingredient, so a lower metric is better. We train on a set of 17 objects and test with a subset of 9 objects from the training set, which are various plushies. To what extent can our approach tackle tasks that require memory compared to other methods?All evaluated methods incorporate aπ h andπ l, and the baselines change the input context of the high-level policyπ h while using the sameπ l. The Long History policy still performs on average 34%worse than MemER, necessitating strategies such as our method that consolidate keyframes rather than naively extending the context. Lastly, our method has>90%on all tasks with the most common failure case being failures in the low-level policy executing the subtask, which can be rectified with better low-level correction data. How does our high-level policy, finetuned from an open-source VLM, compare to propri- etary off-the-shelf VLMs?Since our approach outperforms other selections ofπ h and performs similar to the Human HL policy, we investigate if our method is necessary given existing state- of-the-art VLMs may already have this capability. J