REAL METHOD of "Extending the Context of Pretrained LLMs by Dropping Their Positional Embedding" (arXiv 2512.12167v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

2025-12-16 Extending the Context of Pretrained LLMs by Dropping Their Positional Embeddings Yoav Gelberg1,2, Koshi Eguchi1, Takuya Akiba1 and Edoardo Cetin1 1Sakana AI,2University of Oxford So far, expensive finetuning beyond the pretraining sequence length has been a requirement for effectively extending the context of language models (LM). First, positional embeddings (PEs) serve a crucial role during pretraining, providing an important inductive bias that significantly facilitates conver- gence. Empirically, DroPE yields seamlesszero-shotcontext extensionwithout any long-context finetuning, quickly adapting pretrained LMs without compromising their capabilities in the original training context. Our findings hold across different models and dataset sizes, far outperforming previous specialized architectures and established rotary positional embedding scaling methods. Introduction Figure 1| DroPE generalizes zero-shot to long se- quences.Needle-in-a-haystack retrieval accuracy on sequences at2× the original context length withno long context training(zero-shot context extension). Transformersestablishedthemselvesasthe predominantarchitecturefortrainingfoun- dation models at unprecedented scale in language and beyond (Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Jumper et al., 2021; Team et al., 2023). The defining feature of transformers is abandoning ex- plicit architectural biases such as convo- lutions and recurrences in favor of highly generalself-attentionlayers(Vaswanietal., 2017), while injecting positional infor- mation about the sequence through posi- tional embeddings (PEs) and causal mask- ing. However, despite significant efforts to scale attention to long sequences on mod- ern hardware (Dao et al., 2022; Liu and Abbeel, 2023; Liu et al., 2023a), this powerful layer is inherently bottlenecked by quadratic token-to- token operations, which makes pretraining at long sequence lengths computationally intractable at scale. Yoav Gelberg (yoav@robots.ox.ac.uk), Edoardo Cetin (edo@sakana.ai) arXiv:2512.12167v1 [cs.CL] 13 Dec 2025 Extending the Context of Pretrained LLMs by Dropping Their Positional Embeddings Figure 2| DroPE matches RoPE’s in-context perplexity.We compare three training recipes: (1) a RoPE transformer trained for 16K steps (16B tokens), (2) a NoPE transformer trained for 16K steps, and (c) a DroPE transformer obtained by training the 14K-step RoPE checkpoint for 2K additional steps. The DroPE recipe matches the RoPE transformer’s loss within 2K steps and achieves lower final perplexity than the NoPE-from-scratch baseline under the same budget. Our method is based on three key theoretical and empirical observations. First, explicit positional em- beddings significantly facilitate pretraining convergence by baking in an important inductive bias that isdifficulttorecoverfromdataalone. Our findings hold across LMs of different architectures and sizes up to 7B parameters pretrained on trillions of tokens, establishing a new standard for developing robust and scalable long-context transformers. (2) In Section 4, we discuss why RoPE-scaling methods fail to reliably attend across far-away tokens 2 Extending the Context of Pretrained LLMs by Dropping Their Positional Embeddings when evaluated zero-shot on long sequences, showing that these approaches inevitably shift attention weights, hindering the model’s test-time behavior. (3) In Section 5, we introduce DroPE, a new method that challenges the conventional role of positional embeddings in transformers, motivated by our empirical and theoretical analyses of its role as a transient but critical training inductive bias. DroPE can be incorporatedat no extra costinto established training pipelines, and can be used to inexpensively empowerarbitrary pretrained LLMs in the wild. Preliminaries Self-attention.Let ℎ1,...,ℎ 𝑇 ∈ℝ 𝑑 be the representations fed into a multi-head attention block. Theattentionoperation then computes a𝑇×𝑇 matrix of attention scores𝑠𝑖𝑗 and then weights 𝛼𝑖𝑗 between all pairs of sequence positions, and reweighs value vectors: A multi-head attention block computes multiple attention outputs 𝑧(1) 𝑖 ,...,𝑧 (𝐻) 𝑖 , concatenates them, and projects to the model dimension:𝑜𝑖 =𝑊𝑂[𝑧(1) 𝑖 ,...,𝑧 (𝐻) 𝑖 ]. Formally, let the training and inference context lengths be𝐶train < 𝐶test, and define the extension factor𝑠=𝐶 test/𝐶train. 3 Extending the Context of Pretrained LLMs by Dropping Their Positional Embeddings NoPE transformers.In a parallel line of work, there have been efforts to train transformers without PEs, commonlyreferredtoasNoPEarchitectures(Havivetal.,2022;Kazemnejadetal.,2023), toavoid the need for rescaling RoPE frequencies. Explicit positional embeddings are beneficial for training Figure3|RoPEoutperformsNoPE.Training losscurvesforaRoPEandNoPEtransformers on 16B fineweb tokens. (2023) prove that the first attention layer in a NoPE transformer canperfectly reconstructsequence positions, and subsequent layers can emulate the effects of relative or absolute positional embeddings. Throughout this section, we study the sensitivity of the attention positional biasA𝑐 to the transformer’s parameters and interpret∥∇𝜃A𝑐∥ as bounding the rate at which non-uniform attention patterns can emerge during training. In summary, we demonstrate that while NoPE attention can learn positional bias, attention non- uniformity develops slowly early in training due to boundedA𝑐 gradients at initialization. In other words, scaling 7 Extending the Context of Pretrained LLMs by Dropping Their Positional Embeddings Figure 8| RoPE scaling shifts semantic attention mass.Attention weights of the last token (query) with tokens from a retrieval target (keys) in a semantic head evaluated on a NIAH probe. We start by selecting a positional attention head in a pretrainedQwen2.5-0.5Bmodel by examining its average attention positional bias (Definition 3.1) across layers. for a standard RoPE base𝑏= 104, a transformer with head dimension𝑑𝑘 = 64, will have at least five low frequencies for which𝜙𝑚(𝐶train)< 2𝜋, even at a training context of𝐶train = 32,000. Therefore, to constrain phases to remain in range, any scaling method must choose𝛾𝑚≤ 𝐶train 𝐶test = 1 𝑠, which becomes increasingly small as the extension factor𝑠 grows. Despite only recalibrating at the very end of training, at no extra cost, DroPE matches the final in-context validation perplexity of RoPE trained on the full 16B tokens, showing a clear edge over the NoPE baseline trained w