REAL METHOD of "Rethinking Code Similarity for Automated Algorithm Design with LLMs" (arXiv 2603.02787v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Therefore, assess- ing algorithmic similarity directly from code, distinguishing genuine algorithmic innovation from mere syntactic variation, becomes essential. While various code similarity metrics exist, they fail to capture algorithmic similarity, as they focus on surface-level syntax or output equivalence rather than the underlying algorithmic logic. We propose BehaveSim, a novel method to measure algorithmic similarity through the lens of problem-solving behavior as a sequence of intermediate solutions produced during execution, dubbed as problem-solving trajectories (PSTrajs). BehaveSim clusters generated algorithms by behavior, enabling systematic anal- ysis of problem-solving strategies—a crucial tool for the growing ecosystem of AI-generated algorithms. 1 INTRODUCTION The emerging paradigm of Large Language Model-based Automated Algorithm Design (LLM- AAD) (Liu et al., 2026) has garnered significant interest for its potential to autonomously generate code implementations of expert-level algorithms. This approach integrates a LLM into an iterative search framework (e.g., an evolutionary algorithm), where the LLM proposes candidate algorithms and the search routine governs the overall process. instead of first articulating an algorithm’s design logic and then implementing it in code, the core ideas are often implicitly encoded in the generated algorithm implementation. Methods in the first category analyze programs in a static setting without executing them, i.e., calculating similarity based on features derived from their code. Examples demonstrating existing code similarity metrics are insufficient for measuring algorithmic similarity.(a)Existing code similarity metrics, on the one hand, find the breadth-first search (BFS) and depth-first search (DFS) algorithms highly similar, despite the two algorithms being inherently different in their traversal logic. On the other hand, they also find that a re-implementation of DFS (Code 3 ) based on recursion is a completely different algorithm from the original iteration- based implementation (Code 2 ), despite the two codes essentially representing the same algorithm. (b)Merely checking the output of two algorithms cannot distinguish between two distinct algorithms. Both insertion sort and bubble sort algorithms yield identical sorted arrays, despite being inherently different algorithms. However, a fundamental limitation arises when applying existing code similarity metrics to assess algorithmic similarity:they primarily evaluate surface-level syntax or output equivalence rather than capturing the underlying algorithmic logic. These cases collectively demonstrate that accurate assessment of algorithmic similarity must account for an algorithm’s problem-solving behavior — specifically, the approach it employs to solve a given task. In this work, we introduceBehaveSim, a tangible method for measuring similarity between algorithms from the behavioral perspective. Specifically, we propose to define behavior similarity based on the problem-solving trajectory (PSTraj) of an algorithm, where a PSTraj is a sequence of intermediate or partial solutions generated by an algorithm on a problem. In essence, BehaveSim provides a new angle to quantify the novelty of an algorithm from the perspective of behavior similarity (to existing algorithms). Recent advances have suggested that maintaining diversity among candidate algorithms is crucial for guiding the search towards high-quality algorithms (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). Being able to automatically and quantitatively analyze algorithms becomes critically important to ensure 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 defselect_next_node(cur_node, destination_node, unvisited, dist_mat):if notunvisited.size:returndestination_nodedist_to_unvisit= \dist_mat[cur_node, unvisited]index = np.argmin(dist_to_unvisit)next_node= unvisited[index]returnnext_node Step=5Step=15Step=25Algorithm 1 defselect_next_node(cur_node, destination_node, unvisited, dist_mat):if not unvisited.size:returndestination_nodedist_to_unvisit= \dist_mat[cur_node, unvisited]index = np.argmax(dist_to_unvisit)next_node= unvisited[index]returnnext_nodeStep=5Step=15Step=25Algorithm 2 Metric:Sim.:DFG1.0Token.88AST1.0CodeBLEU.94Embed..98 Metric:Sim.:Behavior Similarity (Ours).49 1234567891011 1234567891011 Starting CityCityRoute Figure 2: Algorithm 1 chooses the nearest neighbor node of the current node, while Algorithm 2 always steps to the farthest node away from the current node. Taking algorithms generated by an existing LLM-AAD method as an example, we demonstrate that BehaveSim can organize generated algorithms into clusters with similar behavior, facilitating the discovery and analysis of distinct problem-solving strategies. 2.1 EXISTINGCODESIMILARITYMETHODS A common approach in existing code similarity methods first derives features from code implementa- tions and then measures similarity based on those features. 2.2 LIMITATION OFEXISTINGMETRICS FORALGORITHMICSIMILARITY A Methodological Perspective.While existing static code similarity methods (i.e., token-, structure- , graph-, and embedding-based methods) are effective at software engineering tasks (e.g., clone detec- tion, code retrieval), they struggle to capture the dynamic problem-solving behavior of algorithms. Algorithm 1 controls the step toward the nearest neighbor node, while Algorithm 2 always chooses the farthest node. • Both static similarity methods (token-, structure-, and embedding-based methods) and execution-trace-based methods consistently yield high similarity for Type-1 and Type-2 data, which have similar code. MEASURINGBEHAVIORALSIMILARITY BETWEEN ALGORITHMS Scope of Algorithms.This work focuses on a general class of algorithms that progressively refine solutions through successive updates, as opposed to one-shot solution generation. This formulation encompasses a broad spectrum of important algorithms, including search and sorting algorithms, optimization methods (e.g., gradient descent, heuristics), and many machine learning training procedures. We find that the similarity between Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 3 is higher than that between Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, as reflected in both the similarity results and intuitive observations, indicating that our approach can handle both continuous and permutation solution types and can reflect intuitive behavioral similarity between algorithms. 7 Published as a conference paper at