REAL METHOD of "P3D: Highly Scalable 3D Neural Surrogates for Physics Simulations with Global Context" (arXiv 2509.10186v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce a hybrid CNN- Transformer backbone architecture targeted for 3D physics simulations, which significantly outperforms existing architectures in terms of speed and accuracy. This setup allows for training large-scale models with reduced memory and compute requirements for high-resolution datasets. We evaluate our backbone architecture against a large set of baseline methods with the objective to simultaneously learn the dynamics of 14 different types of PDEs in 3D. 1 Introduction Training neural networks on high-resolution data substantially increases the required GPU memory and compute costs. We evaluate the P3D backbone architecture through an extensive comparison with existing architectures for modeling physics simulations in 3D, training on 14 different types of dynamics simultaneously. We then train P3D as a surrogate model for isotropic turbulence in 3D at resolution 5123 and demonstrate how our network trained on crops of 1283 can be scaled to the entire domain, while achieving high accuracy with temporally stable autoregressive rollouts. We propose to link the bottleneck layers of P3D with a sequence-to-sequence model, calledcontext model, for an efficient global processing and information aggregation similar to highly optimized self-attention mechanisms in LLM layers like HyperAttention [16] or linear alternatives like state space models [14]. Additionally, we propose a direct mechanism to let global information flow back to higher processing levels by injecting information into adaptive instance normalization layers. • We introduceP3D, a hybrid CNN-Transformer architecture for autoregressive prediction of high-resolution physics simulations in 3D, combining CNNs for fast learning of local features and windowed self-attention for deep representation learning. (1) learning multiple types of simulations at the same time, (2) scaling P3D trained on crops of 1283 to a high-resolution simulation of isotropic turbulence at 5123, and, (3) generating probabilistic samples from P3D trained via flow matching for the velocity and pressure fields of a turbulent channel flow, closely matching the ground truth flow statistics. • We propose mechanisms for efficient global information processing, including linking bot- tleneck layers with a sequence-to-sequence context model and injecting global information into adaptive instance normalization layers via region tokens. • We evaluate different setups for finetuning, which enable a more fine-grained control of precomputation and gradient backpropagation through encoder and decoder blocks to reduce VRAM and compute requirements. In this work, we among others target training our model architecture as a diffusion model for probabilistic predictions. Pretraining and 3D SurrogatesThere has been an increased interest in training foundation models, which are pretrained on multiple PDE dynamics simultaneously [42, 55, 61]. These pretrained models can be used either for zero-shot-predictions or for finetuning when adapting to new dynamics, which allows for improved results with fewer training samples. Efficient Transformer ArchitecturesTransformers have become a dominant backbone architecture in deep learning due to their high computational efficiency and their ability to model long-range causal relationships [9, 57]. For example, to restrict the computation of the attention operation to a local window [41], or to compute the attention only across the data axes [20]. P3D Transformer The key components of the proposed P3D hybrid CNN-Transformer architecture are the hierarchical U-shape structure with the hybrid encoder- and decoder-pair based on convolutional and Transformer blocks. Attention and positional encodingThe self-attention operation used by transformers has quadratic complexity in the number of tokens. The central building block of our transformer encoder is the windowed multi-head self-attention [41], which only computes self-attention within a local region. The architecture of the transformer encoder block combines the Swin Transformer [41] and the Diffusion Transformer [46, DiT] into a 3D variant. (1) the patchification is replaced by a large convolutional encoder and decoder, (2) we removed shifting of windows for computing the windowed attention. Our general strategy for learning large-scale simulations is to pretrain models on smaller crops of the simulation and then scale the trained networks to larger inputs. To address this shortcoming, we link the bottleneck layers of the U-shape architecture with a sequence model. Our im- plementation uses n= 6 layers with Hy- per Attention [16]. Within each decoder block, for each adaptive instance normalization layer with scale or shift operations, we transform the region token via an MLP layer to a region embedding vector which is added to the embedding vector of the conditioning c. Saving memoryDuring finetuning of the context network layer, it is not necessary to backpropagate gradients through the entire architecture. We introduce different setups for memory efficient training in Section 3.3 and Figure 5. 3.3 Training Methodologies Supervised trainingFor tasks that have a deterministic solution, such as training a surrogate model for a numerical solver, the P3D Transformer can be trained in a supervised manner using mean squared error (MSE) loss, enabling fast, single-step inference. (c) includes the context network for global information processing, which can also be trained by randomly disabling gradient backpropagation for a percentage of the encoders and decoders, see (d). In (e) the latent codes from a pretrained encoder can be precomputed and only the context network and decoder are trained. Diffusion trainingTo allow for sampling from the full posterior distribution rather than approximat- ing an averaged outcome, diffusion training is preferable for probabilistic solutions. We typically employ explicit Euler steps with a suitable, chosen step size ∆t. 3.4 Scaling Output Domains We consider different setups for training and inference, see Figure 5, which include training on the full domain (a), on crops (b) and different training variants in combination with the context network (c) to (e). While it is preferable to train on small crops due to compute requirements, for inference, we generally want to process the full domain. (1) we scale to the full domain via the translation equivariance of the P3D architecture, i.e., we combine the domain crops and process them as a 