REAL METHOD of "Differentiable Model Predictive Control on the GPU" (arXiv 2510.06179v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, its adoption has been limited by the in- herently sequential nature of traditional optimization algorithms, which are chal- lenging to parallelize on modern computing hardware like GPUs. We demonstrate substantial speedups over CPU- and GPU-based baselines, significantly improving upon state-of-the-art training times on benchmark rein- forcement learning and imitation learning tasks. Finally, we showcase the method on the challenging task of reinforcement learning for driving at the limits of han- dling, where it enables robust drifting of a Toyota Supra through water puddles. https://youtu.be/r42iJBw-L4E 1 INTRODUCTION Differentiable optimization tools enable leveraging the structured and precise outputs of optimiza- tion algorithms as inductive biases in machine learning, reducing data requirements and enforcing constraints. These methods also enable data-driven tuning of optimization algorithms, reducing time-consuming manual expert-driven development using data. Recent methods for differentiable optimal control, such as (Bambade et al., 2024; Frey et al., 2025) only run on central processing units (CPUs) to leverage the time-induced sparsity of optimal control problems (OCPs) via sequential algorithms such as the iterative linear quadratic regulator (iLQR) (Amos et al., 2018). DO solves opti- mization problems inz(the forward pass) and computes sensitivities with respect to parametersθ(the backward pass), moving along the loss surfaceℓdefined by the opti- mization problem. Consider the generic parametric, equality-constrained, optimization problem P:z= arg min z∈Rn f(z, θ)subject tog(z, θ) = 0, wherez∈R n are optimization variables,θ∈R p are parameters, f:R n ×R p →Ris a cost function, andg:R n ×R p →R q defines equality constraints. In the context of optimal control, for instance, the iLQR method leverages the sparse-in-time structure of OCPand uses Riccati recursions to break the optimization problem into smaller one-step problems that are solved recursively over timet= 0, . At each iteration of the SQP scheme, given an initial guess for the solutionz, we approximate the cost ofOCPby a linear-quadratic function and linearize the dynamics constraints, to obtain the parametric quadratic program (QP): , xT−1 , uT−1 , xT ), and(Q, q, R, r, A+, A, B, C)depend on the parameters θ, and are computed in parallel overOCPproblem instances and time stepst= 0, . COMPUTINGSENSITIVITIES VIA THEIMPLICITFUNCTIONTHEOREM Given a solutionztoOCPcomputed via SQP,DiffMPCcomputes the sensitivities with respect to θusing (3) (see Algorithm 2). The most expensive step consists of solving the linear system ez eλ  =  G H ⊤ H0 −1  ∂ℓ ∂z (z) 0  .(7) This linear system is the same as the linear system in (6) used for the forward pass, with(−b, d) replaced with( ∂ℓ ∂z ,0). The solution to (9) is then computed using the PCG method, summarized in Appendix A.2 (see Algo- rithm 3). Similarly, for the second step in (9), using the structure present in(G, H), the variables zt = (xt, ut)are computed in parallel overt= 0, . After solvingQP, a standard line search (Nocedal & Wright, 2006, Algorithm 18.3) is used to select an appropriate step towards the solution ofOCP. The merit function is defined as a weighted sum of the cost and constraints, and is evaluated in parallel over different predefined step sizes to further leverage GPU parallelism. First, all matrices are eval- uated in parallel for each SQP iteration (e.g.,(Q t, Rt, At, . Since the algorithm is tailored for GPUs, large batch sizes can be used for training. The RL task consists of maximizing the rewardR(x, u) :=−(∥x∥ 2 2 +∥u∥ 2 2) aggregated over50environment time steps for a batch size of64randomized environments, by learn- ing the MPC’s quadratic cost parameters. 4.2 TIMINGRESULTS FORIMITATIONLEARNING 0 5 100 0.5 1 1.5 2 Training Time (s) Model Loss 0 5 100 0.5 1 1.5 2 Imitation Loss Trajax DiffMPC Figure 4: The goal of this experiment is to eval- uate end-to-end training speed on an imitation learn- ing task, with each training loop consisting of solving a batch of nonlinear optimization problems, computing the imitation loss, backpropagating gradients, and updating weights. Figure 4 reports the training loss and model loss, defined as ∥θ−θ ⋆∥2 whereθ ⋆ are the true parameters of the policy used to generate the data. The losses are shown as a function of measured training time, stopping at 200 epochs.DiffMPCtrains substan- tially faster (approximately a 2 times speedup), highlighting its efficiency for imitation learning. For each initial state-environment tuple(x i 0,E i), we generate closed-loop rollouts of 200 steps by repeatedly solving the MPC problem, applying the controlu θ t , and simulating the evolution of the system given the sampled environmentsE i. We found that using a large episode length (>100time steps) and batch size (≥32) is necessary for robust training. We train the policy for 1000 steps with a batch size of 32, taking14hours on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090. First, additional inequality constraints can be accounted for inOCP by penalizing them in the cost, and control bounds can be accounted for in the dynamics (e.g., con- trol bounds are enforced in the simulator for RL in Section 5). Handling such inequality constraints via augmented Lagrangian or interior-point methods (Howell et al., 2022; Bambade et al., 2024; Frey et al., 2025; Zuliani et al., 2025) might lead to more reliable convergence and higher-quality solutions. A.2 PCG ALGORITHM The Projected Conjugate Gradient (PCG) algorithm introduced in (Adabag et al., 2024) is used to solve the linear KKT systems inDiffMPC(see Algorithm 3). A.3 LINE SEARCH After solving eachQP, we use a standard line search method (Nocedal & Wright, 2006, Algorithm 18.3) described next. The objective of the line search is to select an appropriate step sizeα∈(0,1]so the new solution(x+α(x + −x), u+α(u + −u))is closer to an optimal solution toOCP. The line search method is described in further details in Algorithm 4. 17 6:α←min( ↘α) 7:foreα∈ ↘αdosequentially 8:if∆φ eα<0then 9:α←eαselect largest step size 10:Break 11:Return: We then consider a linear problem to facilitate ablations on the problem size and study the impact of warm starting on the PCG algorithm. All methods use compute gradients via implicit differentiation and use float64 precision. For these evaluations onQPproblems,mpc.pytorchis constrained to 1 iLQR iteration, the line search is disabled, and flags are set so th