REAL METHOD of "pi-Flow: Policy-Based Few-Step Generation via Imitation Distillation" (arXiv 2510.14974v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this, we proposepolicy-based flow models(π-Flow).π-Flow modifies the output layer of a student flow model to predict a network-free policy at one timestep. The policy then produces dynamic flow velocities at future substeps with negligible overhead, enabling fast and ac- curate ODE integration on these substeps without extra network evaluations. To match the policy’s ODE trajectory to the teacher’s, we introduce a novel imitation distillation approach, which matches the policy’s velocity to the teacher’s along the policy’s trajectory using a standardℓ 2 flow matching loss. However, these models rely on a costly denoising process for inference, which integrates a probability flow ODE (Song et al., 2021) over multiple timesteps, each step requiring a neural network evaluation. To reduce the inference cost, diffusion distillation methods compress a pre-trained multi-step model (the teacher) into a student that requires only one or a few network evaluation steps. This necessitates the use of complex training methods, such as progres- sive distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Liu et al., 2023; 2024), consistency distillation (Song et al., 2023), and distribution matching (Sauer et al., 2024a; Yin et al., 2024b;a; Salimans et al., 2024). To sidestep the difficulties in shortcut-predicting distillation, we propose a novelpolicy-based flow model(π-Flow or pi-Flow) paradigm: given noisy data at one timestep, the student network predicts a network-free policy, which maps new noisy states to their corresponding flow velocities with negligible overhead, allowing fast and accurate ODE integration using multiple substeps of policy velocities instead of network evaluations. To train the student network, we introducepolicy-based imitation distillation(π-ID), a DAgger- style (Ross et al., 2011) on-policy imitation learning (IL) method.π-ID trains the policy on its own trajectory: Specifically, the matching employs a standardℓ 2 loss aligned with the teacher’s flow matching objective, thus naturally preserving its quality and diversity. • We proposeπ-Flow, a new paradigm that decouples ODE integration substeps from network evaluation steps, enabling both fast generation and straightforward distillation. • We introduceπ-ID, a novel on-policy IL method for few-stepπ-Flow distillation, which reduces the training objective to a simpleℓ 2 flow matching loss. At test time, the model can generate samples by first initializing the noisex 1 ←ϵand then solving the ODE to obtainlim t→0 xt. In practice, flow matching models approximate the ODE velocity dxt dt using a neural network Gθ(xt, t)with learnable parametersθ, trained using theℓ 2 flow matching loss: POLICY-BASEDFEW-STEPGENERATION Inπ-Flow, we define the policy as anetwork-freefunctionπ:R D ×R→R D that maps a state (xt, t)to a flow velocity. • Multiplepolicy integration substeps, which integrates the ODE by querying the policy velocity over multiple substeps, obtaining a less noisy state byx tdst ←x tsrc + R tdst tsrc π(xt, t) dt. Unlike previous few-step distillation methods,π-Flow decouples network evaluation steps from ODE integration substeps. In this section, we introduce a simple policy-based imitation distillation (π-ID) algorithm based on DAgger-style (Ross et al., 2011) on-policy imitation. 3 and Algorithm 1, for a time interval fromtsrc tot dst (i.e., a 1-NFE segment), we first feed the initial state(x tsrc , tsrc)to the student networkG ϕ to obtain the policyπ. We then sample an intermediate timet∈(t dst, tsrc]and roll out adetachedpolicyπ D fromt src totusing high- accuracy ODE integration (with a small step size of1/128), yielding an intermediate statex t on the policy trajectory. Finally, we compute a standardℓ 2 flow matching loss between the two velocities, and backpropagate its gradients through the policyπto the student networkG ϕ. Because the student forward/backward pass dominates compute while policy and teacher queries are relatively cheap, we may repeat the rollout-and-matching step multiple times for additional teacher supervisions. Data-dependent and data-freeπ-ID.The initial statex tsrc can be obtained via forward diffusion from real datax 0 (data-dependent Algorithm 2), or viaπ-Flow’s reverse denoising from random noisex 1 (data-free Algorithm 3). (2011), on-policy imitation learning guarantees that the performance of the learned policy is bounded by the teacher’s performance plus an error term that scales asO(nε), wherenis the number of substeps andεis the average imitation error per step, which is strictly better than theO(n 2ε)compounding-error behavior of off-policy behavior cloning. For the GMFlow policy, we introduce GM dropout in training to stochastically perturb and diversifyπ-ID rollouts to make the policy more robust to potential trajectory variations. 5.2 IMAGENETDIT Our study utilizes two pretrained teachers with the same DiT architecture: Each π-Flow student is initialized with the teacher weights and then fully finetuned using theπ-ID loss. Comparison with prior few-step DiTs.In Table 2, we compareπ-Flow (GM policy withK= 32) to prior few-step DiTs on ImageNet 256 2: In contrast,π-Flow uses a minimal training framework with no JVP and adaptive loss scalings, yet still outperforms the original MeanFlow DiT across both 1-NFE and 2-NFE generation. During student training, we freeze the base parameters inherited from the teacher and finetune only the expanded output layer along with 256-rank LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022) on the feed-forward layers. On HPSv2, FIDs are computed against the 50-step teacher generations, reflecting teacher alignment. This contrasts with previ- ous GAN or VSD-based methods that often require frequent checkpointing and cherry-picking (Ge et al., 2026), demonstrating the scalability and robustness of our approach. Forπ-Flow, each policy generation step (with one network evaluation) is followed by 32 policy integration substeps on average. 6 RELATEDWORK Prior work on diffusion model distillation primarily focuses on predicting shortcuts towards less noisy states, with training objectives ranging from direct regression to distribution matching. Progressive distillation methods (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Liu et al., 2023; 2024; Frans et al., 2025) make further improvements via a multi-stage process that progressively increases the student’s step size and reduces its NFE by regressing the previous stage’s multi-step outputs with fewer steps, yet this introduces error accumulation. The