REAL METHOD of "Internal Planning in Language Models: Characterizing Horizon and Branch Awareness" (arXiv 2509.25260v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Yet, the typical training method for LMs, next token prediction, focuses only on predicting the next token, which seemingly suggests LMs are myopic. Given the above aspects about planning, this paper seeks to understand, To what extent are LMs forward-looking and branch-aware? How does the training method (NTP vs. Our results show that planning is task-contingent and weakly modulated by the training objective loss, i.e., MTP versus NTP. Training with MTP loss modestly reduces purely myopic behavior. In contrast to them, our method (§ 2) en- ables the study of LMs both behaviorally and structurally, by examining their internal mechanisms, without the need for labor-intensive circuit discovery or strong assumptions on the LM. Similar to some of these information-theoretic approaches (Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Skean et al., 2025; V oita et al., 2019), our method makes use of information theory. 2 METHOD Given a prefix sequence of lengthT,x 1:T = [x1, x2, . Hidden states may encode small variations due to token positions, normalization shifts, or attention noise, factors that are critical for exact out- put reconstruction but irrelevant for studying planning structure. In the first step, we train a model that maps each collectionG S to a coarse discrete representationZ S. Using the trained model, we then obtain dataset-wide codes for the target hidden states and use these to estimate mutual information between the coarse representations of LM’s internal computations. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Preﬁx Output G𝒮 Language Model G𝒮 Encoder Decoder ̂G𝒮 Z Discretization Codebook vector Step 1: TrainVQ-VAEs G𝒮A Encoder A ZA Discretization G𝒮B Encoder B ZB Step 2: Since neural networks are effective at learning representations, we employ an encoder-decoder neural network architecture: 2017).VQ-VAEis a framework consisting of an encoder-decoder network with a trainable embed- ding codebook between them to discretize the encoder’s output. Concretely, for each family of index setsSused in our analyses, we train a separate singleVQ-VAE consisting of an encoderE, a codebook{e k}K k=1 ⊂R de, and a decoderD. Given a blockG S, the encoder produces a latent vectorr S =E(G S )∈R de. During the training ofVQ-VAEmodel, gradients are propagated through the quantization step using the straight-through estimator (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). The overall training objective combines reconstruction, standard vector-quantization, and two regular- ization terms that promote informative and well-used codes: In 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 addition to vanillaVQ-VAE’s training objective we introduceL cos, a cosine-similarity penalty that pushes codebook embeddings{e k}to be diverse, andL ent, an entropy term that discourages collapse to a small subset of codes. For each family of blocks, we then train aVQ-VAEso that its encoder maps eachG S to a discrete codeZ S ∈[K], whereKis the codebook size (Step 1). In Step 2, we apply the trained encoder and codebook to the full dataset to obtain codesZ A andZ B for two com- pared block collectionsG A andG B, count their co-occurrences. 3 ANALYSIS OF PLANNING CAPABILITY We leverage our method to investigate two core planning-related aspects—(3.1) how much a model’s prefix computation is forward-looking about future tokens, and (3.2) whether it preserves alternative correct continuations—and, as an application of the same framework, (3.3) how decision-relevant information is encoded across layers and earlier prefix blocks when producing next-token decisions. multi-token.In our analysis, we examine two variants of LM training objectives:M NTP is trained with the standard next-token prediction (NTP) loss (LNTP), which optimizes conditional likelihood of the immediate next token, andM MTP is trained with the multi-token prediction (MTP) loss (L MTP), which encourages models to align their hidden states with predictions across multiple forthcoming tokens. Taken together, these results indicate that LMs trained with both NTP and MTP loss can exhibit non-myopic behav- ior when trained on tasks that demand it. (2023) and consistent with the design choice of assigning longer attention spans to higher layers (Sukhbaatar et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2020). We evaluate models trained with standard NTP versus MTP losses on a synthetic CFG task, PF tasks, and natural text; we find no consistent differences between NTP- and MTP-trained models. A METHOD DETAILS In this section, we explain the details of our method and implementation. We design the encoderEand decoderDaccording to the structure of the hidden state blocks, which span the layer dimension, token index dimension, and hidden state vector dimension. •Multiple layers at the same token index.For each layerℓ∈ L, we first process the sequence {hℓ t}with a transformer encoder. In the decoder, we first upsample the time dimension by mapping˜r S with an MLP to a maximum original sequence of length with d-dimensional vectors, then refine per-token reconstructions with a transformer encoder. A.2 TRAINING AND LOSSES OFVQ-VAE Training setup.We train eachVQ-VAEon hidden state blocksG S extracted from a fixed, pre- trained LMMover datasets used in our analyses. Objective.Given an input blockG S and encoder outputr S =E(G S)∈R de, we quantize by nearest neighbor k⋆ = arg min k∈[K] ∥rS −e k∥2 2,˜r S =e k⋆ , and reconstruct bGS =D(˜rS)with straight-through gradients for the quantizer (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). Let pk = exp(−α∥rS −e k∥2 2)PK j=1 exp(−α∥rS −e j∥2 2) , then we minimize the negative entropy Lent =−H(p) = KX k=1 pk logp k, which promotes higher-entropy assignments during training and discourages mode collapse. Rationale for the objective.The reconstruction term certifies that codes retain task-relevant infor- mation aboutG S, the VQ term ties encoder outputs to discrete codes, the cosine penalty promotes discriminative summaries that support our information-theoretic analyses, and the entropy term plus stabilization heuristics sustain broad code usage throughout training. In the planning horizon experiments,VQ-VAE,1 andVQ-VAE,2 (used for prefix hidden states) are trained for 15,000 optimization steps each, corresponding to 0.96M sequences in total, while the last-layerVQ-VAEis trained for 10,000 steps (0.32M sequences). In the branching experiments,VQ-VAE,1 andVQ-VAE,2 (for prefix states) are trained for 20,000 (0.64M sequences) and 15,000 steps (0.48M sequences), re