REAL METHOD of "Queue Length Regret Bounds for Contextual Queueing Bandits" (arXiv 2601.19300v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 QUEUELENGTHREGRETBOUNDS FOR CONTEXTUALQUEUEINGBANDITS Seoungbin Bae1, Garyeong Kang 1, Dabeen Lee 2∗ 1Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST 2Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University sbbae31@kaist.ac.kr, river if@kaist.ac.kr, dabeenl@snu.ac.kr ABSTRACT We introducecontextual queueing bandits, a new context-aware framework for scheduling while simultaneously learning unknown service rates. The main challenge in the analysis is that the lists of remaining job features in the queue may differ under our policy versus the opti- mal policy for a given time step, since they may process jobs in different orders. To address this, we propose the idea of policy-switching queues equipped with a sophisticated coupling argument. We show that our algorithm, CQB-ε, achieves a regret upper bound of eO(T −1/4). We also consider the setting of adversarially chosen contexts, for which our sec- ond algorithm, CQB-Opt, achieves a regret upper bound ofO(log 2 T). A central difficulty in these platforms is the necessity to account for individual jobs with diverse features and contexts, such as job sizes, power usage, user profiles, and compatible devices, when assigning them to processors. This motivates real-time scheduling algorithms that si- multaneously learn unknown context-dependent service rates from observed queue dynamics while making job-server assignments in real time. in queue length under a given policy versus the optimal policy, provide a useful lens for developing and analyzing algorithms that ensure stability even when service rates are unknown. Recently, Kim & Oh (2024) consider a context-aware approach in which each queue is assigned a fixed contextual vector, and all jobs within the same queue share the same context. Then a job in a queue is allocated to a server whose service rate is determined by the contextual vector and the unknown parameter of the server. Another issue is that they define regret to maximize the cumulative weight sum for the MaxWeight algorithm, which is far from capturing queue length regret. Motivated by these limitations, we proposecontextual queueing bandits, a new context-aware frame- work to learn unknown service rates where jobs arrive with heterogeneous contextual features, the agent selects a job–server pair for assignment in each time step, and the service/departure rate is de- termined by a logistic model with the contextual feature and the unknown server-specific parameter. We present two algorithms, CQB-εand CQB-Opt, and evaluate the policies via the notion of queue length regret. Unlike previous work that assumes a fixed context for each queue, allowing heteroge- neous contexts brings about a specific challenge. Addressing this issue is the main challenge in analyzing algorithms designed to minimize queue length regret. • We introducecontextual queueing bandits, a novel context-aware framework for schedul- ing and queueing system control while simultaneously learning unknown service rates. Jobs carryheterogeneous contextinformation, based on which the agent selects a job and assigns it to a server so that the departure rate is maximized. This is the first work to establish a provable decay rate for queue length regret under contextual queueing bandit settings. • The main challenge in analyzing queue length regret is that, for a given time step, the list of remaining job features in the queue under our policy may differ from the remaining feature list under the optimal policy. We refer to this asqueue state misalignment, which makes it difficult to compare the queue states under two distinct policies for a given time step. To address this, we takepolicy-switching queueswhich follow our policy up to a certain round and then switch to the optimal policy thereafter. • We show that our algorithm, CQB-ε, achieves a queue length regret bound of eO(T −1/4), which vanishes for largeT. To achieve the decaying bound, our algorithm proceeds with two phases; it goes through apure-explorationphase first and switches to anε-greedy 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 policy. We can argue that the gap between service rates for the job-server pairs under the algorithm and the optimal policy is nonincreasing. For the ad- versarial setting, our second algorithm, CQB-Opt, achieves a queue length regret upper bound ofO(log 2 T). First, logistic bandits consider exogenous action sets shared by all policies, but action sets in our setting are endogenous and policy-dependent. Then we define the filtrationF t :=σ(X 1,A(1),D(1), E(1), . Thenqueue length regretis defined as RT =E[Q(T)−Q ∗(T)], whereQ ∗(t)is the queue length at the beginning of time steptunder the optimal policy. Algorithm 1 works under Theorem 3.3, but for the adversarial setting and Algorithm 2, we lift the assumption. We defineQ(t 1, t2)as the length of the queue at the beginning of time stept 2 under our policy applied from time stepst= 1tot 1 and the optimal policy applied fromt=t 1 + 1tot 2 −1. The serverk + i assigned to the first queue succeeds, i.e.,D +(t) = 1, ifU i,2 ≤µ((x + i )Tθ∗ k+ i ), and D+(t) = 0ifU i,2 > µ((x+ i )Tθ∗ k+ i ). , Tdo 2:ift∈[1, τ]andA(t−1) = 1then▷Pure-exploration 3:x t ←x (t−1), kt ←p+ 1 4:p←p+ 1 (modK) 5:else ift∈[τ+ 1, T]andE(t−1) = 1andA(t−1) = 1then▷ε-exploration 6:x t ←x (t−1), kt ∼Unif([K]) 7:else▷UCB-based rule 8:(x t, kt)←arg max x∈Xt, k∈[K]µ(xT bθt−1,k) +β t−1,k ∥x∥V −1 t−1,k 9:end if 10:Match(x t, kt)and receiver t 11:fork= 1, . In fact, we will show that our algorithm, described in Algorithm 1, guarantees thatm t ≤M t where{M t}t∈[T] is a nonincreasing sequence and that δt ≤∆ t where{∆ t}t∈[T] is a nondecreasing sequence. For each algorithm, we evaluateN= 10instances overT= 5000rounds and report the av- erage queue length at timeTwith±1standard deviation across runs. The first plot of Figure 4 compares our algorithms (Algorithms 1 and 2) against (i) a random policy and (ii) the optimal pol- icy (iii) four additional baseline algorithms; further details are provided in Section A. Future directions include (i) establishing lower bounds for queue length regret, (ii) extending the framework to multiple queues, and (iii) incorporating operational constraints such as a maximum waiting time (time in queue) constraint. We follow the same algorithm as Algorithm 2, while performing random exploration in every round with probabilityε=T −1/2. We follow the same algorithm as Algorithm 2, 