REAL METHOD of "Efficient and Sharp Off-Policy Learning under Unobserved Confounding" (arXiv 2502.13022v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 EFFICIENT ANDSHARPOFF-POLICYLEARNING UNDER UNOBSERVEDCONFOUNDING Konstantin Hess1,2,*, Dennis Frauen1,2, Valentyn Melnychuk1,2, Stefan Feuerriegel1,2 1LMU Munich 2Munich Center for Machine Learning *Corresponding author:k.hess@lmu.de ABSTRACT We develop a novel method for personalized off-policy learning in scenarios with unobserved confounding. standard policy learning assumes unconfoundedness, meaning that no un- observed factors influence both treatment assignment and outcomes. We show in experiments with synthetic and real-world data that our method out- performs simple plug-in approaches and existing baselines. Our method is highly relevant for decision-making where unobserved confounding can be problematic, such as in healthcare and public policy. We first derive asharp boundon the value function for scenarios with unobserved confounding and, hence, avoid the unstable minimax optimization as in other methods. We then propose a novelone-step bias-corrected estimatorto achieve semi-parametric efficiency and thus guarantee that our estimator has the lowest variance among all unbiased estimators. We finally provide theoretical guarantees that minimizing our estimated sharp bound on the value function ensures that our method yields theoptimalconfounding-robust policy. (iv) Through extensive experiments using synthetic and real-world datasets, we show that our method consistentlyoutperformssimple plug-in estimators and existing baselines. (i) the direct method (DM) (Qian & Murphy, 2011) leverages estimates of the response functions; (ii) inverse propensity weighting (IPW) (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015) re-weights the data such that in order to resemble samples under the evaluation policy; and (iii) the doubly robust method (DR) (Athey & Wager, 2021; Dudik et al., 2011). As a remedy, previous works leverage causal sensitivity analysis or related methods to obtain bounds on the unidentified policy value (Bellot & Chiappa, 2024; Guerdan et al., 2024; Huang & Wu, 2024; Joshi et al., 2024; Namkoong et al., 2020; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2024), which can then be used to learn an optimal worst-case policy. We provide a thorough discussion on the work by Kallus & Zhou (2018a; 2021) and a detailed comparison to our method in Supplement B. In contrast, our method can handlediscretetreatments, and, therefore, requires entirely different influence functions. That is, we are interested in:Which policy yields the optimal value under the worst-case unobserved confounding, given our sensitivity constraints? Objective:Formally, the optimal confounding-robust policy π∗ is the solution to the minimax problem π∗ = arg min π∈Π sup ˜p∈P(Γ) V(π).(6) However, the existing method (Kallus & Zhou, 2018a; 2021) for our task has key limitations: Finally, we propose anextension of our methodfor scenarios where the aim is to optimize the relative improvement of a policy over a given baseline policy such as the standard of care in medicine (Section 4.4). We now state our first theorem, which provides a sharp upper bound of the value function under our sensitivity constraints P(Γ). Algorithm 1 presents a flexible procedure to learn confounding- robust policies for parametric policy classes Πθ (e.g., neural networks). Fortunately, our method only requires one additional as- sumption, namely, boundedness of the outcome |Y| ≤Cy. First, we provide a closed-form solution for an upper bound of the regret function Rπ0 (π), given our sensitivity constraintsP(Γ). 5 EXPERIMENTS In the following, we evaluate the performance of our method against: As is standard in causal inference liter- ature (Hess & Feuerriegel, 2025; Hess et al., 2024; Kallus et al., 2019), we evaluate our method on synthetic data in order to have access to ground-truth counterfactuals. Varying confounding strength:First, we demonstrate the performance of our method for increasing levels of unobserved confounding. In our method and (Kallus & Zhou, 2018a; 2021), we set the sensitivity parameterΓequal toΓ ∗. Here, our method achieves arelative performance gain by up to a factor of4. Robustness analysis:Next, we show that our method is robust to mis-specification of the sensitivity parameter Γ. We again compute the regret of our learned policy over a randomized baseline policy to showcase the improvement.Figure3 shows that our approach yieldsrobust results even for mis-specified Γ (i.e., when Γ̸= 7 ). Further, even under the (almost) no assumptions constraint of Γ = 100 , our method provides significant improvements over the biased DR estimator. Here, we compare our method against a na¨ıve plug-in estimator of our sharp bounds based on Proposition 4.1. We again report the regret over a randomized baseline policy.Fig- ure4 shows that our method performs better in low sample settings, and achieves larger performance gains when in- creasing the sample size. We evaluate our method on a real-world medical case study. Our method yields the best treatment policy and is robust over differentΓ. Here, we vary the sensitivity parameter for both the method by Kallus & Zhou (2018a; 2021) and our method. Our method per- forms best at Γ = 24 . Further, our method has the overall best treatment strategy. Only for very small Γ, the performance of our method deteriorates – this is expected, as it does not guard against unobserved confounding and is therefore biased, and in contrast to standard methods, requires estima- tion of more complex nuisance functions. In contrast, our method is highly stable for appropriate parameterizations of Γ, which confirms the effectiveness of our method, and shows its applicability to medical scenarios. However, these methods primarily focus on the identification of policy value bounds without semi-parametrically efficient estimation procedures. This then leads to a global change in the worst-case weights assigned to all units. That is, nuisance estimation errors then donotenter to the final bound estimate as first order bias, but only as lower order biases. Further, there isnosingle threshold index k∗ in our method whose mis-estimation can flip the worst-case assignment for the entire sample. • Our method remains stable.Our estimator maintains tight value bounds and stable performance as da increases. The one-step correction based on the efficient influence function ensures that first-order sensitivity to errors in the estimated nuisances is eliminated. Their method computes worst-case regret relativ