REAL METHOD of "Spinning Straw into Gold: Relabeling LLM Agent Trajectories in Hindsight for Successful Demonstrations" (arXiv 2607.04235v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We address this by utilizing a source of supervision overlooked in existing post-training methods: A variety of methods have been explored to train LLM agents, including supervised fine-tuning (SFT), direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), and other reinforcement learning (RL) techniques (Schulman et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2025). • We propose a novel post-training method for LLM agents, Hindsight Supervised Learning (HSL), which iteratively mines successful demonstrations by relabeling agent trajectories and fine-tunes the agent on the relabeled data. • Based on operational insights from our theoretical analysis, we introduce two simple yet effective learning methods, irrelevant-action masking and sample reweighting, which are further validated through ablation studies. • Our experiments on ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020), PlanCraft (Dagan et al., 2024) and WebShop (Yao et al., 2022) demonstrate that (1) HSL iscompatiblewith existing post- training methods such as SFT and DPO, yielding notable improvements (e.g., by 8%−32% success rate in ALFWorld), (2) HSL is sample-efficient. For instance, with less than a quarter of ground-truth demonstrations, it outperforms baseline methods trained on the full dataset. Post-training methods for these agents follow two main approaches. Nevertheless, this approach is complementary to existing learning algorithms, and we demonstrate that it can provide an additive improvement when combined with different post-training methods. While these methods assume a single goal or instruction per trajectory, we propose to mine all achieved goals within the trajectory. More importantly, these data synthesis methods generate training data using a different model from the target LLM agent, which is fine-tuned with the synthesized dataset fixed. While this approach, based on HER, trains the agent on the relabeled experiences with the original offline RL objective, GCSL (Ghosh et al., 2019) instead applies supervised learning to relabeled successes. First, most existing methods assume the agent has direct access to the whole state of the environment. 3 METHODS In this section, we present Hindsight Supervised Learning (HSL), a new post-training method for LLM agents. We then explain the relabeling process in detail, the core component of HSL, which consists of two steps: goal identification and 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Original objective Hindsight objective Goal Trajectory Relabeled Data Training Data You are in the middle of a room. Trajectory collection.At each training step, we sample b goals expressed in natural-language instructions I∼D train from the training set. This HSL training pipeline on the relabeled demonstrations D′ can be combined with a wide range of existing post-training methods, including SFT and DPO, on Dtrain. We then extract each pair of a relabeled goal and its corresponding trajectory segment (τS(I ′ k), I′ k) as a successful demonstration, whereS(I ′ k)is the step whereI ′ k is newly accomplished. For each pair (τS(I ′ k), I′ k), we reuse M to infer a label zu∈1,...,S(I ′ k) for each action au in τS(I ′ k), indicating its relevance to I ′ k: First, even in successful trajectories, the agent may accomplish additional tasks at intermediate steps. πH (a|τ, o, I′) = Pr πθ  a|τ|+1 =a τ|τ| =τ, o |τ|+1 =o, S M (I ′) =|τ|+ 1  (1) recall that SM (I ′) denotes that the first timestep I ′ is achieved. And hence, the training objective on relabeled demonstrations is defined as: Suggested by Theorem 1, we further incorporate the SFT loss on ground-truth demonstrations Dtrain using a mixture weight λ, and thus the resulting learning objective is: LHSL θ =λL D′ θ + (1−λ)E d=(τ,I)∼D train " 1 T TX t=1 −logP θ(at|τt−1, ot, I) # .(4) Similar to many existing methods of post-training LLM agents (Song et al., 2024), HSL requires ground-truth demonstrations for stable learning. However, as we will show later in the experiment, HSL is sample efficient and achieves performance that matches or exceeds baseline methods while using much lessD train. The evaluation set consists of aseensplit (new tasks within scenes present in the training set) and anunseensplit (rooms or layouts absent from the training set). Because the model trained on the full dataset achieves near-perfect success rates across all tasks in ALFWorld, we focus on SFT+HSL trained with only 800 ground-truth demonstrations. Watch every step! llm agent learning via iterative step-level process refinement. B LIMITATIONS Limitations of the Proposed Method.Our method, in its current form, uses an external LLM for zero-shot relabeling without fine-tuning, so it depends on the reasoning ability of powerful models. Our method chiefly exploits exploration in a sample-efficient way, so further work is needed to increase the diversity of exploration. Fourth, while HSL is sample-efficient and reduces reliance on ground truth demonstrations, it unavoidably increases training compute because it uses an external relabeling model. investing more compute during training (GPU hours and LLM tokens) to improve LLM agent performance (Lightman et al., 2023; Song et al., 2024). This limitation is shared by many other post-training methods. Because HSL naturally incorporates SFT, we first trained Llama3.2-1b on ground-truth demonstrations with SFT, then fine-tuned it with the objective in Equation (4) to obtain SFT+HSL. we first fine-tuned the agent with HSL, then continued fine-tuning with DPO. During each HSL training step, rollout collection, relabeling, and loss computation with optimization took an average of 11.53, 62.03, and 24.03 seconds, respectively. Given a sequence of Actions and Observations, track the agent’s Location and Inventory after each step, then derive and record any goals from the templates below that have been completed. Each element of the list should be a JSON object with the following structure for each step: Given a goal and a sequence of actions, observations, with location and inventory derived by a model, decide for each step whether it is necessary to achieving the goal. For each step, provide a brief chain of thought to explain how you judged the step relevant or irrelevant. For each step, output an object with these fields: Given a crafted item, the chosen recipe, and a sequence of actions with slot deltas (inventory, crafting grid, output), decide for each step whether the action is NECESSARY to craft that item. the first step where the