REAL METHOD of "Natural Identifiers for Privacy and Data Audits in Large Language Models" (arXiv 2606.24408v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In particular, most existing methods for auditingdifferential privacyrequire the insertion of specially crafted canary dataduring training, making them imprac- tical for auditing already-trained models without costly retraining. Since LLMs have been shown to leak information about the training data (Carlini et al., 2019; 2021; Duan et al., 2024; Mattern et al., 2023), we need auditing methods to evaluate and quantify their privacy risks, ensuring safe deployment. One key limitation of the formal privacy auditing methods is that they require inserting canary dataduring training. As a result, these methods are inapplicable to pretrained LLMs without retraining, which is typically infeasible due to its high cost. 1 arXiv:2606.24408v1 [cs.LG] 23 Jun 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 training of Pythia models (Biderman et al., 2023), and to a lesser extent, the Dolma dataset (Soldaini et al., 2024), used in training the OLMo models (Groeneveld et al., 2024). We build on the currently fastest single training run auditing approach (Steinke et al., 2023), which needs to include dedicated canaries prior to training. We demonstrate that when NIDs naturally occur in the training set, we can construct their corresponding auditing setpost-hoc from the same distribution and retroactively assess the privacy guarantees of any LLM without the requirement of expensive retraining from scratch. (2023), our method enables truly zero-run (post-hoc) audits of already pretrained LLMs. Beyond formal audits, NIDs also make DI practically applicable, as one only has to identify NID types in the data subset that is suspected to be included in an LLM’s training data, generate a held-out set consisting of NIDs of the same type,i.e.,from the same distribution, and then to perform the DI procedure (Maini et al., 2024). We empirically validate our approach in a controlled environment, using open-source LLMs and their known training data. Our results show that we can accurately infer training membership across diverse data subsets without false positives, suggesting that our approach may be useful in real-world litigations (Coulter, 2024). We adapt the one-run DP auditing framework (Steinke et al., 2023) to leverage NIDs, enabling truly post-hoc DP auditing of pretrained LLMs without modifying the training process and achieving tighter lower bounds. Privacy auditing generally relies on retraining models and inserting canaries during training (Jagielski et al., 2020; Nasr et al., 2023; Steinke et al., 2023; Mahloujifar et al., 2025). In general, DI extracts diverse training membership features for the individual data points in the suspect set using various MIAs, aggregates them, and applies statistical testing to reliably determine whether the suspect set was used to train the model. Additionally, web crawlers can be trained to omit such arbitrary context-free strings when scraping the data from the internet, reducing the likelihood of this data being included in LLMs’ training data. In contrast, our observation is that we can leverage NIDs that are naturally included in LLMs’ training sets, mitigating the need to insert purely random strings and enabling auditing of existing pretrained LLMs without retraining. Since large parts of the data used to pretrain state-of-the-art LLMs are crawled from the internet, these NIDs get naturally included in the LLMs’ training sets. In their method, they select a set of canary data points to be included or excluded during a training run. After training, an auditor attempts to infer for each of these data points whether it was included or not. Subsequent works (Panda et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025) build upon the settings and methods proposed in the original paper, thus requiring retraining. Furthermore, our method operates under more realistic assumptions compared to Kazmi et al. (2024), who, although they relax the assumption of retraining, require training a generative model that must then generate samples following the original training data distribution. (2025), our method can be viewed as a ranking-based generalization, where the task is to correctly identify the true NID from a set of c candidates, by requiring it to appear among the top-r ranked positions, rather than only identifying it as the single top-1 candidate. 0 We consider the NIDs as the input to a training procedureM(also referred to as the mechanism), which may satisfy (ε, δ)-DP. 4 Given the resulting trained model and filtered NIDs with corresponding GIDs, an auditor seeks to infer, for each set Vi, which sample was the NID. By leveraging the NIDs, our framework enables us to compute lower bounds on the privacy parameters of an algorithm without any additional training run of that algorithm. We first identify the NIDs that were present in the training data and denote their total number as m. The key distinction in our approach is that, rather than selecting between two alternatives prior to training, we consider the NIDs as inserted canaries with the GIDs as multiple left-out canary possibilities for each set Vi. In our setting, Theorem 1 states that if the mechanism (also referred to as the training procedure) is ε-DP, any attacker attempting to detect the NID is constrained. Post-hoc DP Auditing Without Retraining in LLMs.We verify that our proposed framework applies to privacy auditing in LLMs by adapting the black-box procedures proposed by Steinke et al. Due to the lack of open-source private pretrained LLMs, to show the capabilities of our method, we finetune multiple Pythia models (70m, 160m, 410m, and 1b) using DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016) We use all NIDs extracted from the Pile test set (Gao et al., 2020). To rank each set of ID from most to least likely to be in the training data, we use Min-K% (Shi et al., 2024) and Loss (Yeom et al., 2018), and report the best result. (2023), which corresponds to a special case of our method where all sets Vi have cardinality c= 2 and the corresponding threshold is ri = 1. The empirical analysis in Figure 3 demonstrates that our method outperforms the baseline across multiple cardinality parameters (c∈ {8,32}) in fixed-length dataset settings. We experiment with Pythia-2.8b, 6.9b, 12b (trained on the Pile), and OLMo-7B2 (trained on Dolma) to cover a range of model sizes and families. to the ground truth training sets, which is impossible for proprietary models where we have no access to the true training data. For the training set, NIDs are draw