REAL METHOD of "TAMMs: Change Understanding and Forecasting in Satellite Image Time Series with Temporal-Aware Multimodal Models" (arXiv 2506.18862v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To explore how to improve the perfor- mance of methods on both tasks simultaneously by enhancing long-range tempo- ral understanding capabilities, we introduceTAMMs, the first unified framework designed to jointly perform TCD and FSIF within a single MLLM-diffusion archi- tecture. Temporal Adaptation Modules (TAM) enhance frozen MLLM’s ability to comprehend long-range dynamics, and Semantic-Fused Control Injection (SFCI) mechanism translates this change un- derstanding into fine-grained generative control. To bridge this gap, we introduce novel, parameter-efficient approach to awaken the latent temporal reasoning abilities of frozen MLLM throughTemporal Adaptation Modules (TAM), designed to both inject explicit awareness of arbitrary time intervals and guide the model’s focus onto salient change narratives, enhancing its performance in long-range temporal change reasoning. To address this, we introduce the Temporal Consistency Score (TCS), the first metric designed to specifically quan- tify the consistency of predicted changes against historical dynamics. • We proposeTAMMs, the first unified framework to synergistically couple temporal change un- derstanding with future forecasting in a mutually reinforcing manner. • We design theTCS, the first metric designed to specifically quantify the consistency of predicted changes against historical dynamics. 3 METHODOLOGY As outlined in the introduction, our TAMMs framework is designed to first empower an MLLM to understand temporal dynamics, and then use this understanding to guide a generative model. To address this without costly full-model finetuning, we introduce Temporal Adaptation Mod- ules (TAM), which has two complementary, parameter-efficient modules designed to “reprogram” a frozen MLLM for temporal awareness, as illustrated in Fig. ti =e [TIME DIFF] +MLP time(ϕ(∆ti))(4) These temporal tokens are then inserted between the visual features of consecutive images (Vi,V i+1), allowing the MLLM’s attention mechanism to directly associate visual changes with the corresponding time interval. A composite loss,L=λ textLtext +λ tempLtemp, guides the training of the adapters by balancing text accuracy with temporal regularization. Together, they enable the frozen MLLM to comprehend change narratives, which are then optimized via a composite loss. The SFCI Mechanism.For each feature maph (enc) l from thel-th level of the U-Net encoder, SFCI extracts and adaptively fuses structural and semantic information. (1)Structural Path:To capture the low-level spatio-temporal evolution, the encoder features are first processed by a frozen 3D Control Block Khanna et al. Staged Training Strategy.We employ a two-stage training strategy to stably integrate semantic guidance. First, we train only the structural path to learn foundational spatio-temporal priors from the image data. Then, with the structural path frozen, we train the semantic components to translate the MLLM’s guidance into control signals, which prevents catastrophic forgetting. A detailed breakdown of the training protocol and loss formulations is provided in Appendix A.6. (2024) due to its MoE architecture and open-source accessibility, while the generative component adapts the U-Net architecture from DiffusionSat Khanna et al. A critical component of our methodology is a multi-stage training strategy for the generative module. A detailed breakdown of our three-stage training protocol, including specific learning rates and opti- mizer schedules for each stage, is provided in Appendix A.9.2. 4.2 METHODCOMPARISON 4.2.1 BASELINES We evaluate TAMMs against comprehensive set of state-of-the-art methods for two primary tasks. We proposedTAMMs, the first unified framework designed to synergistically solve both, built on core hypothesis that empowering MLLM to deeply compre- hend historical dynamics would enable more consistent future forecasting. This paper provides a detailed description of our experimental methodology, including training steps, model configurations, and hardware specifications. Prompt Type TCS BLEU-4 CIDEr-D PShort 0.9580 0.2610 0.8910 POurs (Default)0.96900.26690.9030 PV erbose 0.96150.26750.8980 A.6 TRAININGSTRATEGY FOR THEGENERATIVEMODULE Training the generative component of TAMMs, particularly the Enhanced Control Module (ECM), requires a carefully designed strategy to ensure stable learning and effective fusion of structural and semantic information. To address this, we propose atwo-stage training procedure 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 designed to decouple these learning objectives, prevent catastrophic forgetting of structural priors, and facilitate a robust integration of semantic control. STRUCTURALCONTROLPRE-TRAINING Objective:The primary goal of this stage is to teach the model the fundamental dynamics of spatio- temporal evolution based purely on the visual information within the SITS sequence. Setup:We freeze the parameters of the pre-trained LDM U-Net (θ U-N et) and the entire MLLM module. The noise prediction networkϵ θ is conditioned only on the noisy latentz τ , the timestepτ, and the U-Net’s internal encoder features{h (enc) l }. LStage 1 =E x0,ϵ∼N(0,I),τ  ϵ−ϵ θ(zτ , τ| {h(enc) l };θ frozen U-N et, θtrain st ) 2 2  (9) By backpropagating only throughθ st, this stage effectively pre-trains the 3D Control Blocks to extract meaningful and coherent temporal structures from the U-Net’s latent space. SEMANTIC ANDTEMPORALREFINEMENT Objective:With a strong structural prior established, the goal of this stage is to learn how to ef- fectively translate the MLLM’s high-level semantic understanding (M t) into fine-grained control signals and adaptively fuse them with the pre-trained structural features. Loss Formulation:Training again minimizes the diffusion loss, but the noise prediction network is now additionally conditioned on the semantic vectorM t. A.9 TRAININGDETAILS A.9.1 MODELARCHITECTURE ANDHYPERPARAMETERS We adopt a U-Net architecture based on DiffusionSat for the core diffusion model, enhanced with our MLLM-based temporal understanding modules (PTE, CTP) and the Semantic-Fused Control Injection (SFCI) mechanism via the Enhanced ControlNet Module. A.9.2 MULTI-STAGETRAININGSTRATEGY The training process for our Enhanced Control Module (ECM) follows a carefully designed three- stage strategy. The stages below focus specifically on optimizing the diffusion loss (L diff =E  ∥ϵ−ϵ θ(zτ , τ,cond)∥2 2  ) for the Enhanced ControlNet Module and e