REAL METHOD of "BridgeDrive: Diffusion Bridge Policy for Closed-Loop Trajectory Planning in Autonomous Driving" (arXiv 2509.23589v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

By adhering to the principles of diffusion, our method fully lever- ages the expressive power of anchors for guidance while maintaining diffusion models’ ability to represent diverse human-like driving behaviors. In each figure, the blue solid line depicts the denoised trajectory of the selected anchor at a specific timestep t, the red solid line depicts an example of the denoised trajectory of an un-selected anchor, and the rest scattered dots of other colors depict the denoised trajectories of other anchors at the timestept. The denoised trajectory is then used to compute the score function for denoising. They form a discrete set of atomic building blocks that planners use to 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 construct solutions, which can dramatically reduce planning complexity, enforce safety constraints, improve robustness to dynamic environments, and align planning with task objectives (Chai et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b). Algorithm 1BridgeDrive Training (ours) 1:Initializeθ# denoiser parameter 2:repeat 3:x, y, z∼p d(x, y, z) 4:#x: guidance 5:t∼p(t)#t∈[0, T] 6:ϵ∼ N(0, I)# random noise 7:x t =a ty+b tx+c tϵ# noisy trajectory 8:Updateθwith the gradient w(t)∇θ∥xθ(xt, t, y, z)−x∥2 9:untilconvergence 10:returnθ Algorithm 2DiffusionDrive Training 1:Initializeθ# denoiser parameter 2:repeat 3:x, y, z∼p d(x, y, z) 4:#x: In the next section, we will introduce our training and planning algorithms for this diffusion bridge policy. 3.3 TRAINING ANDPLANNINGALGORITHMS In our diffusion bridge planner, each diffusion bridge is constructed between a ground-truth trajec- toryx 0 :=xand the nearest anchorx T :=y∈ Yto it. During training, we fit a neural network denoiserx θ(xt, t, xT , z)to predict the denoising meanˆx0|t ≈E[x 0|xt, xT , z]given noisy trajectory xt ∼q(x t|x0, xT )at timestept, the nearest anchorx T =ytox 0, and the conditional informationz for the driving scene. min θ Ep(t)pd(x0,xT ,z)q(x t|x0,xT )  w(t)∥xθ(xt, t, xT , z)−x0∥2 .(9) Our training algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. Also, the training procedure of BridgeDrive is simulation-free, which allows us to efficiently train the denoiser without simulating the forward SDE in Eq. In addition, since the ground-truth trajectoryx 0 is not available for computing the nearest anchoryat inference time, we also train a classifierh ϕ(z,Y)to predict the nearest anchorytox 0 givenzwith the cross entropy loss. ∇xt logq(x t|xT , z)≈ atxT +b txθ(xt, t, xT , z)−xt c2 t .(10) Our planning algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 3 and depicted in Fig. Then, we iteratively compute the denoised mean trajectoryˆx 0|t using our denoiserx θ(xt, t, xT , z), calculate the score functionˆst using Eq. Although image diffusion models use higher-order ODE solvers (Karras et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022) to accelerate sampling, we find that first-order methods, such as the DDIM sampler (Song et al., 2021a), are sufficient for the planning task with minimal number of function evaluations. 3.4 MODELARCHITECTURE Our model consists of three major components: Perception Module.The perception module extract useful features from lidar, front camera image, and target point for the downstream diffusion planner. Diagram for the planning procedure of BridgeDrive in Algorithm 3. The output of the perception module is denoted aszand will be used as the conditional guidance information in the denoiser modulex θ(xt, t, xT , z). For a noisy trajectoryx t at timesteptand its corresponding anchorx T =y, we first interact them with BEV via deformable spatial cross-attention modules. Anchor Classifier.The classifierh ϕ(z,Y)employs cross BEV attention module and cross feature attention module betweenzand all anchorsY, followed by an FFN which outputs the probability that each anchory i ∈ Yshould be used for trajectory generation. Our method shows SOTA performance on both Driving Score (DS) and Success Rate (SR). Notably, by using a principled diffusion bridge model, our method achieves significant improvements over previous dif- fusion baselines (including those with prior knowledge from VLA), demonstrating the effectiveness of the diffusion module in the autonomous driving task when following our paradigm as discussed in Section 3.2. A potential avenue to further improve our method is to integrate prior knowledge from VLA, which is left as future work. The dataset actively filters for critical change frames and refines expert behavior, thereby focusing on high-quality decision-making moments while re- ducing its size, which improves training efficiency and strengthens the model’s learning in crucial driving scenarios. It should be noted that, for DiffusionDrive geo, all modules remain iden- tical to those of our method except for the diffusion part to ensure a fair comparison. All methods use identical expert and modules except for the diffusion part. 4.4 OPEN-LOOPEVALUATION ONNAVSIM We additionally evaluate our method on NA VSIM using the metrics from DiffusionDrive (Liao et al., 2025), summarized by the PDM score (PDMS), a weighted composite of no at-fault collisions (NC), drivable area compliance (DAC), time-to-collision (TTC), comfort (Comf.), and ego progress (EP). Our method provides a principled diffusion framework incorporating anchor guidance, out- performing prior work by 7.72% and 2.45% in success rate on Bench2Drive with PDM-Lite and LEAD datasets, respectively. Deterministic planners.Some end-to-end autonomous driving planners relies on models such as multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) or variational autoencoders (V AEs). These methods demonstrate how MLP and V AE-style architectures can serve as efficient baselines for end-to-end planning, though they often face limitations in modeling the full multi-modality of human driving behaviors compared to generative paradigms such as diffusion or flow-based models. Our method shows SOTA performance on both Driving Score (DS) and Success Rate (SR). This is be- cause full diffusion does not use anchors and thus omit all anchor-related cross-attention modules. It should be noted that in both DiffusionDrive and our BridgeDrive model, the primary computational cost stems from the perception and cross-attention modules. The full diffusion model is approximately half the size of BridgeDrive, as it does not have cross-attention modules for anchors. (2024) proposed a data filtering method to reduce redundancy in training datasets. Classifier.The classifier in DiffusionDrive consists of cross-at