REAL METHOD of "Foundation Visual Encoders Are Secretly Few-Shot Anomaly Detectors" (arXiv 2510.01934v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Foundation Visual Encoders Are Secretly Few-Shot Anomaly Detectors Guangyao Zhai1,2∗ Yue Zhou1,2∗ Xinyan Deng1 Lars Heckler1,3 Nassir Navab1,2 Benjamin Busam1,2 1Technical University of Munich 2Munich Center for Machine Learning 3MVTec Software GmbH {firstname.lastname,b.busam}@tum.de lars.heckler@mvtec.com Abstract–Few-shot anomaly detection streamlines and simplifies industrial safety inspection. Large-scale pre-training of foundation visual encoders has advanced many fields, as the enormous quantity of data helps to learn the general distribu- tion of normal images. Extensive experiments show that our approach supports multi-class detection and achieves competitive performance while us- ing substantially fewer parameters than prior methods. Backed up by evaluations with multiple foundation encoders, including fresh DINOv3, we believe this idea broadens the perspective on foundation features and advances the field of few-shot anomaly detection. 1 Introduction Pre-trained Natural Image Manifold Figure 1:Manifold Projection. The design of training paradigms and the advances in computational resources enabled the computer vision commu- nity to learn powerful visual encoders whose feature embeddings are adjustable to many downstream tasks (Oquab et al., 2024). These foundation visual encoders are trained to en- code samples from the core distribution of nor- mal natural images as illustrated by the natu- ral image manifold in Figure 1. We validate FOUNDAD on multiple foundation visual encoders, including DINO series (Caron et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2024; Sim ´eoni et al., 2025), vision branches of vision-language models (VLMs) (Zhai et al., 2023b; Radford et al., 2021), and a pre-trained convolutional neural network (CNN) (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). The experiments show that FOUNDAD with DINOv3 achieves the best performance, and even it is trained on multiple classes with compact parameters, it is superior to methods that particularly focus on each class Li et al. In contrast to these methods actively training encoders, we keep the foundation encoders frozen to enjoy the natural image manifold, and instead solely train a simple network to adapt and project the pretrained embeddings exclusively and effectively for the few-shot anomaly detection (cf. In summary, the contributions of our work are threefold:(i)We reveal the correlation of embedding distance and anomaly amount in images for foundation visual encoders.(ii)Based on point (i), we introduce a feature projection method to efficiently discriminate between anomaly and normality in the embedding space. The nonlinear projector is lightweight and can be trained with minimal demonstrations.(iii)Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that the performance of our pipeline 2 Encoder Projector Synthesis A. Training pipeline.Normal training imagesI r are first processed by the anomaly synthesis module to generate augmented samplesI s. Feature embeddings of the augmented image and the original image are extracted by theAnomaly-Aware Encoderθ a and theReference Encoderθ b, respectively (θa =θ b =θ). The training objective is to minimize the distanceD(f ∗ r , fr)between the projected featuref ∗ r and the reference featuref r.B. The anomaly scoreD(f ∗ a , fa)for each patch is computed. 2 Methodology The overall architecture is illustrated in Figure 3. The key components of the framework include an anomaly synthesis module, two identical encoders, and a projector. 2.1 Anomaly Synthesis To train the framework in an unsupervised setting, we utilize a structural anomaly synthesis module inspired by CutPaste (Li et al., 2021). This suggests that a simple synthesis strategy is sufficient to drive anomalous features away from the natural image manifold, aligning with our projector’s training objective. theAnomaly-Aware Encoder(AE), which processes synthesized abnormal imagesI s, and theReference Encoder(RE), which processes original normal imagesI r. On top of these representations, we introduce theManifold Projector, a nonlinear module ap- plied after AE that maps the anomaly-aware features toward the natural image manifold with only few-shot supervision. Given an anomaly imageI s, the encoder yields an embeddingf s =θ(I s), which deviates from the normal embedding fr. Unlike reconstruction-based approaches such as (Yan et al., 2024), our method operates entirely in latent space, substantially reducing computational complexity. 2.3 Training The training process follows the pipeline illustrated in Figure 3. During training, given an original normal imageI r in each iteration, we independently gate anomaly synthesis with a thresholdσ. f ∗ r =ϕ(f s).The training objective is to minimize the discrepancy between the projected feature and the reference normal feature via: BaselineWe evaluate the method against state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods across multi/one-class settings. Implementation DetailsFOUNDAD is compatible with various encoders, and we report the one backed by a pretrained DINOv3 ViT-B (Sim´eoni et al., 2025) here. We also conduct ablation studies with different foundation visual encoders as backbones in Table 3, with different DINOv3 layers in Figure 6, and with different projector designs in Table 4. In contrast, FOUNDAD handles multi-class adaptation effec- tively with its simple projector architecture, even under limited training data. In the 1-shot setting, our method already surpasses strong baselines PromptAD and the previous state-of-the-art LogSAD, with a particularly large margin on VisA by2.2%in P-AUROC and9.8%in PRO over LogSAD. 3.3 Ablation Study Comparison of Different Foundation ModelsTo further investigate the capability of different visual encoders on FOUNDAD, we conduct an ablation study comparing several commonly used encoders in the 1-shot setting on MVTec-AD, as shown in Table 3. Score Layer I-AUROCAUPRP-AUROCPRO Figure 6:Comparison of performance using different layers of DINOv3 in a 1-shot setting on MVTec-AD. Comparison between DINOv3 Layers We analyze the effect of selecting differ- ent layers in DINOv3 for feature extrac- tion in the 1-shot setting on MVTec-AD, as shown in Figure 6. While adjacent layers such as layer 9 and 11 yield comparable results, performance declines when using shallower (e.g., layer 6) or deeper layers (e.g., layer 12), espe- cially in terms of I-AUROC and PRO. Guided by these observations, we adopt a 6-layer self-attention block in our final design, as it offers a favorable 