REAL METHOD of "Is In-Context Learning Learning?" (arXiv 2509.10414v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

ISIN-CONTEXTLEARNINGLEARNING? Adrian de Wynter Microsoft and the University of York adewynter@microsoft.com ABSTRACT In-context learning (ICL) allows some autoregressive models to solve tasks via next-token prediction and without needing further training. However, deduction does not always imply learning, as ICL does not explicitly encode a given observation. We then carry out a large-scale analysis of ICL ablating out or accounting for memorisation, pretraining, distributional shifts, and prompt- ing style and phrasing. In most traditional learning paradigms, a learner observes inputs fromP, and then encodes them within its own knowledge (e.g., updating weights). Then it uses this knowledge to generalise to new examples. An LLM observes, but does not encode, the full training set through the prompt. However, criticisms to empirical research on LLMs note that prompt-and-model dependence makes it hard to reproduce (Li et al., 2025; De Wynter, 2025; Sclar et al., 2024), and that the terminology, methods, and results themselves are unreliable and could lead to misinterpretation (Huang & Chang 2023; De Wynter 2025; also Section 2). We then perform empirical studies accounting for some of the criticisms and shortcomings mentioned; namely, sensitivity to pretrain- ing, memorisation, and dependence on natural language; prompting style and phrasing; and robust- ness to distributional shifts in the observed training and test sets. Thus we focus on evaluating generalisation from datain context(unseenPuntil runtime, and fully-unseenQ); as opposed to generalisation from a model’s pretraining strategy. Our experiments are on four LLMs, nine tasks, and ablations on prompting strategies, training distri- butions, and exemplar setups. ICL under altered training (exemplar) distributions is robust to positionality and proportion of labels in the limit. However, ICL is brittle to altered test distributions (i.e., out-of- distribution; OOD) as the distance between train and test distributions grows, especially in chain-of-thought (CoT; Wei et al. 1.2 INTERPRETATION Our findings are constrained to easily-verifiable tasks (e.g., parity checking or Hamiltonian-cycle verification) in a single call. From within our theoretical framework, we find evidence that ICL presents signs of learning capabilities; but that it is tied to the autoregressive paradigm, and not to any particular LLM, training strategy, or prompting style. Remark that our work is constrained tonon-natural language tasks, with our ablation on natural language limited to the instructions, not the datapoints. These works, like ours, investigated the models’ ability to learn formal languages, or subsets of first-order logic, and also found brittle- ness in OOD scenarios. More constrained works with specific attention types couldrecogniselanguages in the class of constant-depth, polynomial-size alternating circuits. (2024), showed that expanding shots improved performance in natural and non-natural language problems, albeit the main results were constrained to a single model. This latter work argues that ICL arises from the distribution of the elements within the training data, along with the use of the transformer, and it is a driving argument for our work. THENEED FOREMPIRICALEVALUATION OFICL We discuss formalisms for learning and task similarity in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, and tie ICL to these in Section 3.3, noting that they partly overlook the mechanism behind ICL. A learner (algorithm)f:X→ {0,1}observesD until its empirical errorerror(·)is bounded by someϵ∈(0,1/2), where error(f, D) = 1 |D| X ⟨x,c(x)⟩;x∈D 1[f(x)̸=c(x)]≤ϵ.(1) Equation 1 must holds for any other datasetEand distributionQsuch thatE={⟨x i, c(xi)⟩|xi ∼ Q}, whereQis likewise supported onX; that is, if Pr[error(f, E)]≥1−δ,(2) forδ∈(0,1/2). It could also be more complex (e.g., ‘Let’s think and solve step-by-step...’). Conversely, the encoded exemplars have a major contribution in the limit. 4 METHODS Sample prompts are in Appendix H and full task definition and characterisations with respect to ID/OOD are in Appendix E. This is common in theoretical computer science; in addition, LLMs have been claimed to be capable of understanding code. Chain-of-Thought (CoT):Generate a series of steps leading to the desired output with a predefined scheme in the system prompt. 4.3 TASKSOVERVIEW All tasks have their ownΣ, and were selected for being closely-related tasks often seen in LLM evaluations, or well-known problems in computer science. given a graph in adjacency matrix form and a path, decide if it is Hamiltonian. given a maze, two segments of a path, and a sequence of moves, decide if the moves connect both segments. given a maze and a sequence of moves, decide if the moves form a valid path from start to exit. given a list of items and costsC, a sequence of operations Op(add balance, purchase item), and initial and final balancesb 0, bf , verify ifb f =Op(C) +b 0. Same as the verification version, but the learner must computeb f = Op(C) +b 0 for an unknownb f . It has a constrained set of moves, but unbounded states (N). For baselines, we tested decision trees (DT), k-nearest neighbours (kNN), and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) in succession, and reported the best. The training dataset was 2000 entries drawn from aP, and we also generated five balanced, deduplicated test sets, each from aQsuch that||P − Q||∞ =δ, forδ∈ {0,0.2,0.45,0.65,0.85}, whereδ= 0is ID, and the rest OOD. We only use the training set for APO and the selected baselines. How large lan- guage models encode context knowledge? a layer-wise probing study. A learning algorithm is then tasked with classifying samplesx∼ P, wherePis supported on X. It selects a hypothesis (another concept)hsuch that error(h) = Pr x∼P [c(x)̸=h(x)].(6) To learn, the algorithm is given access to a functionO:C×X→ {0,1}that provides i.i.d. Then, a concept classCoverXis PAC-learnable if an algorithm outputs anh∈Csuch that Pr [error(h)≤ϵ]≥1−δ(7) for allc∈C, anyP, andϵ∈(0,1/2)andδ∈(0,1/2), with an observed subsetDbuilt withO. Specific algorithms and approaches, such as the Triggering Learning Algorithm (Gibson & Wexler, 1994) or back-propagation, are not covered here as they may be framed in a model of learning (e.g.,in terms of PAC learning Niyogi 2006). We do not cover other frameworks, such as information theories of learning (Shuell, 1986), since they explicitly require the learner to encode and retrieve knowledge for arbitrary periods of time,