REAL METHOD of "Holdout-Loss-Based Data Selection for LLM Finetuning via In-Context Learning" (arXiv 2510.14459v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Following prior work (Mindermann et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2024; Calian et al., 2025), we aim to select a subset of training data such that the model trained on it minimizes theholdout loss, i.e., the loss on the holdout set. RHO-Loss mitigates per-step retraining by relying on a separate reference model trained on the holdout set. Particularly relevant to our work is RHO-Loss (Mindermann et al., 2022), which estimates the holdout loss a model would incur if trained on a particular example, but requires a separate reference model. In contrast to these data-centric methods, a separate line adopts an algorithmic perspective, directly modifying learning objectives and proposing extensions to SFT or DPO to account for 2 instance-specific differences or improve generalization (Wu et al., 2024; D’Oosterlinck et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025). The standard RLHF pipeline first learns a reward model and then optimizes a policy using RL algorithms such as PPO. Therefore, we aim to select a subset ¯D⋆ ⊂ Dsuch that a model trained on ¯D⋆ minimizes the loss onD ho (i.e., the holdout loss). Then, the subset selection problem in equation 1 reduces to selecting, at each step, the example(x,y)∈ Dthat, when added toD t, minimizes the holdout loss: Specifically, considering the negative log- likelihood as the loss function ( ℓ(y|x;θ) =−logp(y|x;θ) ), and, applying Bayes’ rule under the conditional independence assumption, the holdout loss of the model trained with a particular example can be expressed as (see Appendix A for a reproduction of the derivation in Mindermann et al. Omitting the term independent of (x,y) and reversing the sign, we define the remaining expression as theholdout-loss scoreof each example at stept: 4 (Mindermann et al., 2022) approximates the retraining by training a model only on Dho and reusing it across all selection steps, i.e., ℓ(y|x;θ ⋆(Dt ∪ Dho))≈ℓ(y|x;θ ⋆(Dho)). Because the ICA score, and hence the weights, evolve throughout training, this reweighting strategy adaptively adjusts each example’s contribution to the gradient updates according to the holdout loss the model would incur if trained on that example. 5 Experimental Results We apply our method to both SFT and preference-based alignment (DPO and SimPO), comparing ICA score-based reweighting to standard training (i.e., without reweighting) and to reweighting using scores computed by baseline methods, across multiple models and datasets. Within the high-quality data selection scenario, we additionally evaluate our method on a reasoning- intensive benchmark, GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), which consists of high-quality grade-school 3https://huggingface.co/datasets/community-datasets/yahoo_answers_topics/viewer? views%5B%5D=train 6 math word problems. Evaluation protocol and metricsThe objective of data selection in this paper is to choose a subset of training data such that a model trained on it minimizes the holdout loss. To this end, we define the win rate as the percentage of pairwise comparisons in which a response from a model trained with our method is judged more semantically aligned with the target output than that of a model trained with standard (non-reweighted) or baseline methods. Detailed training configurations are provided in Appendix B.3, and LoRA fine-tuning results with our method are reported in Appendix C.1. Specifically, for each candidate, we use the top k= 3 holdout examples as in-context demonstrations and update scores for all training examples R= 1 time (i.e., computing scores for all training examples only at the initialization step t= 0 ). BaselinesIn the main experiments, we compare our method with standard training (without reweighting) and two closely related baselines using alternative scores: (1)RHO-Loss(Mindermann et al., 2022), which approximates the holdout loss score using a model trained on the holdout set; (2)One-shot learning(Li et al., 2023b), which scores each candidate as the difference between the one-shot loss with the candidate included as context and the zero-shot loss without it. 5.2 Main Results We report the performance of our method across SFT, DPO, and SimPO, comparing against standard training and baseline approaches, in Tables 1, 2, and 3. Comparison to standard trainingAcross all datasets and model families, incorporating our reweighting method leads to consistently better alignment than standard training without reweighting. Against RHO-Loss, which approximates the same selection criterion in equation 4 but requires training an auxiliary reference model, our method achieves comparable—and in some cases superior— performance, while avoiding the additional cost of reference model training. Win rates (%) of our method against each baseline when applied to SFT across models and datasets (higher values indicate better performance of our method). Win rates (%) of our method against each baseline when applied to DPO across models and datasets (higher values indicate better performance of our method). This efficiency advantage arises because LESS and GREATS rely on local-linearization– based influence functions, whose first-order assumptions can be violated under batch data selection and require additional computation to control approximation error, whereas our method avoids this overhead by deriving scores from a Bayesian formulation rather than a first-order expansion. 5.3 Ablation Studies We conduct ablation studies under the SFT setting on LLaMA-3B-Instruct trained on the Ya- hoo_Answers_Topics dataset to examine the effect of key design choices in our method on model performance. Win rates (%) of our method against each baseline when applied to simPO across models and datasets (higher values indicate better performance of our method). Mitigating the effect of noise on GSM8kTo evaluate our method’s ability to select valuable training examples from datasets that may contain suboptimal instances, we conduct SFT on both the original training split and a variant with intentionally corrupted CoT annotations. These results show that reweighting noisy training data with our method can achieve performance comparable to training on the original high-quality dataset, highlighting its potential to mitigate the impact of substantial noise, even on complex reasoning tasks. Our method adds only ∼1.5% overhead, compared to roughly 10% for RHO-Loss and 4% for one-shot learning. The target domain is highlighted in red, and different colors indicate different scoring methods, with our