REAL METHOD of "Leveraging Data to Say No: Memory Augmented Plug-and-Play Selective Prediction" (arXiv 2601.22570v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We seek training-free approaches of low-complexity, applicable to any foundation model and consider methods based on external vision-language model embeddings, like CLIP. To address these issues, we propose amem- ory augmentedPAPSP (MA-PAPSP) model, which augments PAPSP with a re- trieval dataset of image-text pairs. This is leveraged to reduce embedding vari- ance by averaging retrieved nearest-neighbor pairs and is complemented by the use of contrastive normalization to improve score calibration. However, these models are prone to erroneous predictions for reasons that include incorrect align- ment of the two modalities, image or language ambiguities, or samples from the tails of their train- ing distribution. As shown in Figure 1,selective prediction(SP) (Chow, 1957; 1970; El-Yaniv & Wiener, 2010; Whitehead et al., 2022; Dancette et al., 2023; Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017; Wang & Vasconce- los, 2018; Srinivasan et al., 2024) methods address this problem byrefusingto make low confidence predictions, with the goal of minimizing the predictionriskon the samples that theyaccept. There is a need for SP methods for open set tasks. One possibility is to endow the foundation model with some prediction refusal score and train or fine-tune it to optimize the ensuing risk-coverage trade-off. However, most foundation models are large and require large-scale training to avoid overfitting (Stevens et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2025). In many cases, the model may even be a proprietary black box that is impossible to retrain. PAPSP uses an external representation model and the CLIP score to enable selective prediction for VLM tasks like captioning without training. To overcome these, we propose theMemory AugmentedPAPSP (MA-PAPSP) procedure of the lower branch of Figure 1. Methods that leverage this dataset are then proposed to 1) reduce the variance of the SP-VLM representation, by using the average representation of the nearest neighbors of the query image as aproxy embeddingfor the latter, and 2) enhance score calibration, by usingcontrastivescores that normalize the similarity score with respect to alternative text predictions. Like these, it is atraining-free method that instead leverages an external dataset to enhance SP-VLM functionality. Retrieval-Augmented Scoring.Memory-augmented pipelines, first introduced for language gen- eration (Lewis et al., 2020), have been extended to vision–language representation learning (Iscen et al., 2023a;b; Xie et al., 2023). While they do retrieval augmentation just like MA-PAPSP, most models’ pretraining is very similar to CLIPs, and as a result, they have the same limitations like CLIPi.e.unstable representations and uncalibrated scores. In this work, we use the 0-1 loss function for classification problems and the loss L(f(x i),a i) = 1ifr(f(x i),a i)≥β 0otherwise (3) for captioning problems, wherer:Y × Y →Ris a measure of caption similarity, such as CiderN (Vedantam et al., 2015), or METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005) andβ∈Ra similarity threshold. Ideally, the PAPSP module should support anopen vocabulary, be relatively light-weight, and require no training. To address this, we propose to implement PAPSP with anexternalCLIP-style VLRM, based on a pair of encoders of shared output spaceF e. The encoder pair is pre-trained with a loss function that encourages the alignment of the feature vectorsvandwinF e. The score of (4) was then computed between images and their labels. 4 MEMORYAUGMENTEDPAPSP (MA-PAPSP) To improve the performance of PAPSP without training, we propose to complement the pre-trained SP-VLM with retrieval augmentation, as illustrated in Figure 4. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Encoder Caption Encoder Captioner Neighborhood set Retrieval set Cosine Similarity Contrast Accept / Reject Image Captioning model Proxy Proxy embedding Contrastive scores MA-PaPSP Classification/ Image Text Matching Labels y Image RB Figure 4:MA-PAPSParchitecture(i2tr variant of Table 1). 2) This is used to retrieve a setN k of image-caption pairs from retrieval setR. 3) The cap- tions in this set are used to compute a proxy embedding ˜ϕe txt(f(x)), which is a weighted average of the retrieved text embeddings according to (6). 5) The MA- PAPSP score is computed by computing the cosine similarity between pre- dicted,ϕ e img(x), and estimated groundtruth, ˜ϕe txt(f(x)), captions and using (8) to compute a contrastive score. First, theKnearest neighbors ofqare retrieved fromRto form a neighborhood set NK(q) ={(xR i ,y R i )∈ R|i∈ IK(q)}(5) whereI K(q)is the set of indexes ofKnearest neighbors ofqinR. The proxy embedding is then computed by averaging neighbors according to their proximity toq ˜ϕe mod(q) = X i∈IK (q) γ(q,z R i )P j∈IK (q) γ(q,z R j ) ϕe mod(yR i ).(6) Note that these operations can produce a text proxy ˜ϕe txt(q)or an image proxy ˜ϕe img(q)forq, independently of whetherqis an image or a text. This is used to retrieve a set ofKimage text-image pairs from a retrieval datasetR, which are used to generate a proxy embedding forqwith (6). This can be an embedding ˜ϕe txt(q)based on the retrieved texts, or an embedding ˜ϕe img(q)based on the retrieved images. Retrieval Set.We considered three types of retrieval sets:1)in-domainretrieval set of training sam- ples of the evaluation dataset,e.g.training split of MS-COCO (110K); 2)out-of-domainretrieval set combining Conceptual Caption CC12M and CC3M (Changpinyo et al., 2021) and SBU-1M (Or- donez et al., 2011), which have no overlap with any of the evaluation datasets, captioned using BLIP-2; 3) amixeddataset concatenating the two above. In all cases, there isno overlapbetween evaluation and retrieval sets.Out-of-domainwas used for retrieval unless otherwise specified. Impact of the Retrieval Dataset.Table 3 shows how the type of retrieval dataset impacts MA- PAPSP performance. First, for both methods, performance improves with P-VLM model size. Ablations • Neighborhood size • Size of Retrieval Set • Retrieval variants • Effect of relevance threshold • Contrastive component (CC) 4. Implementation.All experiments implemented using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and run on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, using the pre-trained VLMs trained by OpenCLIP (Ilharco et al., 2021). Algorithm.The algorithm of MA-PAPSP is summarized in Algorithm A.1. Algorithm A.1MA-PAPSP 1:Input:image-caption pairz={v,w}, retrieval setR={x i,y i}N i=1 2:Output:scores 3:ComputeN(v)using equation 5. Note that PAPSP-FT, requires train