REAL METHOD of "ParoQuant: Pairwise Rotation Quantization for Efficient Reasoning LLM Inference" (arXiv 2511.10645v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

PAIRWISE ROTATION QUANT IZATION FOREFFICIENTREASONINGLLM INFERENCE Yesheng Liang3,† Haisheng Chen3,‡ Zihan Zhang3 Song Han1,2 Zhijian Liu3 1NVIDIA 2MIT 3UC San Diego †Algorithm lead ‡System lead https://paroquant.z-lab.ai ABSTRACT Post-training quantization (PTQ) compresses the weights and activations of large language models (LLMs) into low-precision representations to reduce memory footprint and accelerate inference. Existing PTQ methods either fail to sufficiently suppress outliers or introduce significant overhead during inference. In this paper, we proposePairwise Rotation Quantization(ParoQuant), a PTQ method that combines hardware- efficient and optimizableindependent Givens rotationswith channel-wise scaling to even out the magnitudes across channels and narrow the dynamic range within each quantization group, effectively addressing the outlier issue. ParoQuant also matches the accuracy of state-of-the- art weight-activation quantization methods. To accelerate edge deployments, weight-only post- training quantization (PTQ) converts model weights to lower-bit-width representations (e.g., INT4), reducing the memory footprint during inference and thus increasing throughput in memory-bound autoregressive decoding. For example, in weight-only quantization, AWQ (Lin et al., 2024b), a widely adopted and fast quantization method, causes a2.8% accuracy dropof 4-bit quantized Qwen3-4B (Yang et al., 2025) on MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024). With the advent of reasoning LLMs (Jaech et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025), we argue thatbothaccuracy and efficiency are critical for practical quantization methods. Magnitude of the k proj weight in the first layer of LLaMA-3-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024) before and after the transform. step, which becomes particularly pronounced in long generation (Zhao et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025a). Thus, there is a critical need for a quantization method that achieves high fidelity with minimal extra overhead. In this paper, we propose Pairwise Rotation Quantization (ParoQuant), a PTQ method that combines high accuracy with minimal computational overhead, making it well-suited to reasoning LLMs. Building on these insights, we introduce scaled pairwise rotation, a hardware-efficient and optimizable transform composed ofindependent Givens rotationsandchannel-wise scaling. To fully exploit the massive parallelism of modern GPUs, we further constrain the rotations to be mutually independent, a system-level design choice that keeps the impact on decoding latency minimal. Thanks to our algorithm-system co-design, under weight-only quantization, ParoQuant achieves an average2.4% improvement over AWQ on reasoning tasks with less than 10% extra overhead, and matches the accuracy of QTIP while being about25% faster. ParoQuant is also applicable for weight-activation quantization, and it matches the best existing quantization methods. Q(X) =clamp  X s  +z,0,2 b −1  ,wheres= max(X)−min(X) 2b −1 , z=−  min(X) s  .(1) In this work, we focus onweight-onlyPTQ,i.e., quantizing weights of pre-trained models while keep- ing the activations in FP16, although our method can be extended to weight-activation quantization (Section A.3). One major challenge of quantizing pre-trained LLMs to low bits is the presence ofoutlier channels across layers (Dettmers et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024b). They occupy the limited dynamic range of low-bit representations and cause precision loss of non-outlier elements, presenting a major challenge to PTQ. Loss curves from optimizing transforms to minimize quantization-induced output error (∥XQ(W)−XW∥ ) for the k proj weight matrix in the first layer of LLaMA-3-8B. 4 METHOD In this section, we introduce ParoQuant, a weight-only quantization method that applies optimized parameter- and inference-efficient rotations to effectively reduce quantization error. Then, we introduce the algorithm to optimize the transform and fine-tune the quantized models. Under this constraint, it follows directly from Equation (4) that the computation for each pair is completely independent and does not interfere with any other pair. 4.2 LAYER-WISEOPTIMIZATION To optimize the scaled pairwise rotation in Equation (8), we adopt a layer-wise optimization scheme to minimize the output loss of each layer. Specifically, for a decoder layerD, we minimize L(Q) =∥Q(D)(X ′)−D(X)∥,(9) where Q(D) is the decoder D with every linear layer quantized after applying the scaled pairwise rotation, X is the input to D of the original model, and X′ is the output of thealready quantized preceding decoder layers. By optimizing with the new output computed from X′ instead of from X, the subsequent layers can compensate for quantization errors introduced by earlier layers, thereby improving end-to-end accuracy. For each layer, we optimize the quantized model in two stages. First, dividing the channel dimension into groups re- duces the memory load required for each thread block. Each layer is optimized for 10 epochs at each stage using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with a fixed set of hyperparameters for all experiments, except for the 70B model, where we adjust the batch size to accommodate memory constraints. QTIP (Tseng et al., 2024b) is the state-of-the-art vector quantization method utilizing randomized Hadamard transform and an advanced trellis quantization algorithm. We apply block-wise quantization with a group size of 128 on all linear quantization methods and the corresponding default settings on vector quantization methods. 6 CONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed ParoQuant, an efficient PTQ method that achieves state-of-the-art quanti- zation accuracy with minimal overhead. ParoQuant matches the 9 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 accuracy of the best existing quantization methods while running much faster, and it consistently outperforms prior efficient quantization methods, especially on reasoning tasks where quantization errors accumulate over long chains of thought. We hope that our method will inspire future research on high-fidelity, low-overhead quantization techniques for next-generation reasoning LLMs. 4 12 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A.1 COREALGORITHMS Algorithm A1:Selection of Independent Channel Pairs Input:W∈R g×D: ,PK ←[ ] forr←1toKdo Arot ←Copy(A)// Tracks available channels within this rotation foreachpair(i, j)∈ Pshuffled do if|P r|=Nthen break ifA rot[i, j] = 0then continue Append(i, j)toP r //