REAL METHOD of "EquAct: An SE(3)-Equivariant Multi-Task Transformer for 3D Robotic Manipulation" (arXiv 2505.21351v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, although both the robot policy and language instructions inherently encode rich 3D geometric structures, standard transformers lack built-in guarantees of geometric consistency, often resulting in unpredictable behavior under SE(3) transformations of the scene. EquAct is theoretically guaranteed to be SE(3) equivariant and consists of two key components: (1) an efficient SE(3)-equivariant point cloud-based U-net with spherical Fourier features for policy reasoning, and (2) SE(3)-invariant Feature- wise Linear Modulation (iFiLM) layers for language conditioning. 1 Introduction Recent breakthroughs in multi-task keyframe action policy learning[52, 13, 14, 29, 15, 8] have been driven by the success of transformer architectures[ 59], which excel at bridging different modali- ties—for example, conditioning policies on natural language instructions. Real world manipulation tasks, however, exhibit rich 3D geometric structure, both in the manipulation policy and the language instructions, which standard transformer architectures do not exploit, e.g., by geometric constraints on their latent features, thereby limiting the geometric consistency of the learned policy. As a result, these multi-task keyframe action methods often fail to generalize to novel 3D scene configurations and require large amounts of robot data to learn the underlying geometric structure from scratch. This paper presents EquAct, a novel architecture that enforces geometric structure through SE(3)- equivariance in multi-task keyframe action policies and SE(3)-invariance in natural language instruc- tions. We first identify the equivariance inherent to keyframe policies, where the keyframe action adapts to the transformation of the observation, and the invariance of natural language instructions, where given an instruction, the keyframe action transformation depends solely on observation. We then introduce a novel SE(3)-equivariant point transformer U-net with field networks for keyframe ∗Equal contribution. action evaluation, alongside novel invariant FiLM (iFiLM) layers to condition the policy on language in a semantically dependent yet geometrically invariant way. EquAct enables multi-task keyframe action learning with a simplified, unified model across diverse tasks – unlike previous SE(3)-equivariant models that allow only for pick and place actions and create separate neural network models for each [ 53, 48, 49, 19]. EquAct is the first method to achieve continuous SE(3)-equivariance (covering both 3D rotation and translation) for multi-task keyframe policy learning, in contrast to[79, 13, 29], which enforces only translational equivariance. While achieving state-of-the-art performance on 18 RLBench SE(2) and SE(3) benchmarks, our method leverages a spherical Fourier representation to achieve computational efficiency during both training and inference, matching the computation overhead of baselines. Nevertheless, EquAct is limited to keyframe actions that cannot solve fine-grained closed-loop tasks and do not leverage pre-trained vision models. We propose a continuous SE(3)-equivariant keyframe policy that includes a novel equivari- ant U-net architecture, a novel invariant FiLM layer, and a novel equivariant field network. A motion planner then generates a collision-free trajectory to reach this predicted goal. Building on this, keyframe imitation learning [52] formulates the problem as supervised learning, where the policy π(o) = a learns to predict the expert keyframe action a given an observation o from expert demonstrations. Specifically, the observation o = {s, e} consists of the scene information s and the end-effector state e = {eT, eopen}, where eT ∈ SE(3) denotes the gripper pose and eopen denotes the gripper aperture. One common approach is data augmentation [ 32, 63], where both observations and corresponding actions are transformed according to Equation 1 during training. Another method is canonicalization, which transforms the input into a standard reference frame aligned with the action space [72]. The first class consists of multi-view- based methods [ 14, 15, 66, 73, 8], where the 3D scene is projected into three orthogonal image planes. EquAct first encodes the observation o = {s, e} into latent spherical features h using a SE(3)-equivariant U-Net, enco, while conditioning the natural language instruction n through invariant iFiLM layers. Based on the encoded features h, EquAct then samples and refines translational query actions and gripper open actions using an equivariant field network, resulting in action value functions Qt and Qopen. A common method is data augmenta- tion [32], where both inputs and outputs are transformed according to the desired group symmetry dur- ing training. In contrast, our work is the first to explicitly identify the SE(3) invariance of natural language instructions in the context of robotic policies, and to introduce simple yet effective invariant FiLM (iFiLM) layers to enforce this invariance within an SE(3)-equivariant policy network. The inference procedure is illustrated in Figure 1 and has the following steps. In parallel, it enforces invariance with respect to natural language instructions via the proposed SE(3)-invariant layer-wise modulation (iFiLM) layers (Section 4.3). EPTU further improves the computational efficiency of EquiformerV2 [ 36] by adopting a U-net-style architecture [47], which incorporates novel spherical Fourier maxpooling layers to compress point cloud features and spherical Fourier upsampling layers to reconstruct features back to the original resolution. These pooling and upsampling layers are interleaved with standard EquiformerV2 [36] graph attention blocks, which first construct a k-nearest-neighbor graph for each point and then apply equivariant attention-based message passing. To extend this operation to the spherical Fourier domain, we propose a novel spherical Fourier upsampling method (Figure 3 (b) right). 4.3 Invariant Feature-wise Linear Modulation Layers (iFiLM) We propose invariant Feature-wise Linear Modulation (iFiLM) layers (Figure 3 (b) left) to enforce the geometric invariance of natural language conditioning in the policy, as defined in Equation 2. Unlike standard FiLM layers [42], which do not guarantee equivariance or invariance, the iFiLM layer is provably SE(3) invariant with respect to the conditioning input k. c′ = iFiLM(c, k), α l, β, γ= MLP(k), (7) c′ l = αlcl, for l >0, (8) c′ 0 = βc0 + γ, for l = 0, 