REAL METHOD of "A Benchmark for Deep Information Synthesis" (arXiv 2602.21143v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, current evaluation benchmarks do not adequately assess their ability to solve real-world tasks that require synthesizing information from multiple sources and inferring insights beyond simple fact retrieval. To address this, we introduce DEEPSYNTH, a novel benchmark designed to evaluate agents on realistic, time- consuming problems that combine information gathering, synthesis, and structured reasoning to produce insights. It remains crucial to evaluate whether such agents can solve real-world tasks that require synthesizing information from multiple sources and inferring insights beyond simple fact retrieval. Despite the substantial promise of LLM-based agents for addressing real-world tasks, most existing benchmarks primarily emphasise shallow fact retrieval tasks (Wei et al., 2024), artificial information- seeking questions (Wei et al., 2025; Mialon et al., 2023), or tasks that require information from a single, particularly well-known source like Wikipedia (Wolfson et al., 2025). A sample task from DEEPSYNTH, illustrating that synthesizing knowledge requires agents to perform multiple steps, including web browsing, gathering information from multiple sources, reasoning over them, and generating the final answer. To resolve this gap, we introduce DEEPSYNTHbenchmark, a new benchmark comprising 120 challenging and diverse tasks, aimed to evaluate the ability of agents to browse the entire web, combine information from unstructured and structured sources (paragraphs and tables) across 67 countries, and perform analysis to synthesize new information and insights. DEEPSYNTHtasks are annotated with a gold standard, manually annotated reasoning chain, which includes all the intermediate steps, answers and all required supporting evidence. To construct DEEPSYNTH, we asked 16 experts to first curate relevant topics and data sources targeting various countries (§2.2), and subsequently formulate possible hypotheses for each of these data sources. Finally, drawing on their analyses, they formulated the corresponding questions, answers, and step-by-step reasoning chains. It consists of 120 tasks that are carefully designed and annotated by experts. Solving these tasks requires agents to formulate plans, decompose problems into sub-steps, select and use appropriate external tools (e.g., document processors, code interpreters), and integrate intermediate results into a final solution. We first outline the criteria for our tasks, then describe our data collection pipeline, and conclude with an analysis of the collected data. The gold-standard answers are intentionally built to be non-retrievable through verbatim lookup in known pre-training corpora or direct web search, compelling systems to plan and perform multi-step reasoning to derive the correct output. 2.2 DATACOLLECTION A common practice in designing deep agentic benchmarks is to start with a fact and then craft a question from it, making the answer difficult to locate (Wei et al., 2025). Since our goal was to ensure answers are non-retrievable, we adopted a different approach. An overview of our data collection process for building the DEEPSYNTHbenchmark key steps: Data Source Identification.In this step (see Figure 2, left), we engaged 16 human experts2 to propose a diverse set of data sources and topics, drawing on their expertise, demographic backgrounds, and interests. We excluded data sources that originated from untrustworthy or non-official websites, including those requiring user authentication, as well as sources containing information that contradicted other verified references. Our objective was to curate tasks that are useful to individuals or groups; therefore, we filtered data sources to retain only those from which useful, verifiable insights could be drawn. For example, we included official statistical reports on“the gender gap in labour force participation rates in Australia”, “computer and digital literacy rates in Sri Lanka”,and“air quality and pneumonia-related deaths across regions in the UK”, since such data enables clear downstream reasoning tasks (e.g., analyzing temporal trends, comparing across regions, or correlating with policy interventions). Hypothesis Generation.We then asked annotators to formulate one or two hypotheses—plausible insights that could be inferred from the selected data sources (see Figure 2 bottom left). The objective of this step was to elicit hypotheses that are both insightful and practically valuable, encouraging reasoning beyond surface-level fact retrieval (see § 2.1(e)). Data sources that did not meet the criteria ofusefulnessandinsightfulness(see § 2.1(b)) were subsequently filtered out.3 After this step, we retained a total of 155 data sources, each paired with its corresponding set of hypotheses. Hypothesis Validation.In this step, annotators were tasked with conducting a detailed analysis of each data source to assess the validity of the proposed hypotheses (see Figure 2 top right). 3Please note this step involves a degree of subjectivity, and we relied on the domain knowledge and judgment of our annotators to ensure the quality of the retained data sources and hypotheses. Intermediate steps 7.54 Web pages per Task 4.2 Avg. Task Formulation.Finally, annotators were asked to formulate task questions along with inter- mediate steps, supporting evidence and corresponding answers. We note that the intermediate steps indicate only one possible reasoning path or planning from question to answer, and that no model or agent necessarily needs to imitate that path. Tasks in DEEPSYNTHare highly detailed, with an average length of 78.49 tokens, an average of 7.54 intermediate reasoning steps and requiring navigation through an average of 4.2 web pages to reach a solution. In particular, we observe that web search and browsing are the most critical skills for retrieving the correct information. 1) for small string differences (with semantic equivalence), this method will reward answers beyond exact match, 2) in case of numerical answers, a small margin (1% to 5.5% difference) can still be considered correct, hence providing more granular and permissible scores. We first evaluate the parametric knowledge and reasoning capabilities of LLMs. How do models perform as the number of intermediate steps increases?We break down the models’ performance based on the number of intermediate steps entailed by DEEPSYNTH tasks. Does providing agents with intermediate steps improve their performa