REAL METHOD of "OneTwoVLA: A Unified Vision-Language-Action Model with Adaptive Reasoning" (arXiv 2505.11917v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To further unlock OneTwoVLA’s rea- soning and generalization capabilities, we design a scalable pipeline for synthe- sizing embodied reasoning-centric vision-language data, used for co-training with robot data. Consider someone preparing a dish:reason- ingenables them to develop a comprehensive understanding of the scene and goal (e.g., interpreting the recipe, planning the sequence of steps), whileactingcorresponds to the physical execution (e.g., 1 arXiv:2505.11917v2 [cs.RO] 1 Mar 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 chopping, mixing) that grounds abstract reasoning in the real world. Typ- ically, a System Two, such as internet-pretrained vision-language models (VLMs) (Beyer et al., 2024; Karamcheti et al., 2024), is dedicated to slow high-level reasoning, generating intermediate reasoning contents. In light of this, we introduce OneTwoVLA, a single unified vision-language-action model capable of both acting (System One) and reasoning (System Two). 1, OneTwoVLA triggers natural language reasoning at key steps — like completing a subtask, detecting an error, or requiring human input — producing outputs such as scene descriptions, task plans, historical summaries, and next-step instructions. A key advantage of this unified model is its natural support for co-training with vision-language data, sig- nificantly enhancing reasoning and generalization. Moreover, their generalization performance degrades substantially when facing novel objects or instructions outside the training distribution (Kim et al., 2024; Black et al., 2024). In contrast, our work enhances reasoning and generalization capabilities through a unified model architecture and a co-training framework. In particular, many studies (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2023; Shi 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1Inference Pipeline of OneTwoVLA Require:VLA modelπ θ, language instructionℓ 1:t←0, I 1:n ref ←initial image, R←none 2:whileR̸=“Task Finished”do 3:DT∼π θ.decide(·|I 1:n t ,I 1:n ref ,ℓ,R) 4:ifDT=[BOR]then 5: ˆR∼π θ.reason(·|I 1:n t ,I 1:n ref ,ℓ,R) 6:R← ˆR, Iref←I t 7:else ifDT=[BOA]then 8:A t∼π θ.act(·|I 1:n t ,I 1:n ref ,ℓ,R,s t) 9: If this inflexible paradigm generates extensive reasoning at every step, it significantly impacts inference efficiency (Zawalski et al., 2024). 3 METHOD In this section, we first introduce the framework of OneTwoVLA in Sec. The vision-language model ofπ 0 auto-regressively generates textual reasoning during inference and is su- pervised via a cross-entropy loss during training. To model complex continuous action distributions, we inherit the action expert architecture fromπ 0 and train it using a flow matching loss (Lipman et al., 2022; Liu, 2022). 1) a detailedscene description, primarily focusing on the locations of task-relevant objects; 2) ahigh-level planthat outlines the sequential steps to accomplish the task; 3) a concise historical summaryto keep the model informed about the task’s progress; and 4) the immediatenext stepthat the robot needs to execute. The accompanying reasoning must reveal the object’s explicit name and, optionally, its location; 2) Long-horizon tasks, where the instruction describes an extended, multi-step objective. The reasoning must supply a high-level, step-by-step plan for completing the task. The robot must sequentially dip beef and one vegetable type, precisely place them into a strainer, and finally lift the strainer. To ensure fair comparison, we fine- tuneπ 0 on the same dataset used for training OneTwoVLA; and 2) a dual-system approach inspired by Hi Robot (Shi et al., 2025), in which Gemini 2.5 Pro serves as the high-level System Two that decomposes complex instructions into sequences of atomic commands (i.e., thenext stepfield in OneTwoVLA’s reasoning content). We then co-train OneTwoVLA on these robot data together with the with 16,000 VL sam- ples synthesized by the pipeline described in Sec. The model proactively searches for non-visible cola by opening the refrigerator inGet Icy Cola, handles complex spatial relationships and occlusion by first removing fruits before retrieving the plate inEmpty Plate, recognizes the need for a tool and uses a nearby stick to sweep distant objects within reach inTool Use. After retraining, OneTwoVLA reasons to retract, reposition to align with the strainer and try grasping again, subsequently succeeding in lifting it up. Bothπ 0 and OneTwoVLA are trained exclusively on robot data, whereas OneTwoVLA-VL is additionally co-trained with 16,000 synthetic vision–language samples. We at- tribute this exceptional generalization capability to VL data co-training, which better activates web knowledge already encoded in the pretrained vision-language model. In contrast, OneTwoVLA and π0 frequently exhibit aimless reaching behaviors — even for objects present in the training data — indicating that they merely overfit to action training data without developing genuine understanding of the visual environment in this complex and diverse setting. First, OneTwoVLA relies on hand- selected heuristics to determine which steps require reasoning. Future work could investigate RL-based training to further strengthen the reasoning capabilities of VLA models. B MORERELATEDWORK Co-training for Robot Learning.Co-training with data from diverse sources has been shown to benefit robot learning (Vuong et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Nasiriany et al., 2024; Hejna et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Doshi et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Maddukuri et al., 2025). The robot first pours oil, then tomato and egg liquid into a cooking machine. The robot must accurately pick up the ingredients sequentially, place them in the strainer, wait for them to cook, and then lift the strainer. The robot must infer that “icy cola” implies the cola is stored in the fridge and therefore plan the necessary steps to open the fridge, locate the cola, and retrieve it. The robot must recognize the need for a tool (a nearby stick), plan to first grasp the stick, use it to sweep the distant cocoa powder can within reach, and only then proceed to pick up the can. All instruction–reasoning pairs are first generated with Gemini 2.5 Pro and then verified by human annotators. This consists of 10 tests for each reference type. Wait for the ingredients to cook and then pick up the hotpot strainer. Some of the beef and the green bok choy are in the hotpot strainer.But I fail to grasp the hotpot strain