REAL METHOD of "SparseEval: Efficient Evaluation of Large Language Models by Sparse Optimization" (arXiv 2602.07909v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

EFFICIENTEVALUATION OFLARGELAN- GUAGEMODELS BYSPARSEOPTIMIZATION Taolin Zhang1,2, Hang Guo2, Wang Lu3†, Tao Dai1†, Shu-Tao Xia2, Jindong Wang4 1College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University 2Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 3Independent, 4Microsoft Research Asia {newlw230630, daitao.edu}@gmail.com ABSTRACT As large language models (LLMs) continue to scale up, their performance on various downstream tasks has significantly improved. Based on these insights, we propose SparseEval, a method that, for the first time, adopts gradient descent to optimize anchor weights and employs an iterative refinement strategy for anchor selection. Extensive experiments demonstrate the low estimation error and high Kendall’s τ of our method across a variety of benchmarks, showcasing its superior robustness and practicality in real-world scenarios. However, such methods typically rely on prompts or predicted probabilities to detect redundancy, which requires additional resources that may be costly or difficult to acquire. This suggests that the model predictions across samples encode a large amount of transferable information, providing support for efficient evaluation. Therefore, we proposeSparseEval, a task-aware efficient evaluation for large foundation models by sparse optimization. For anchor weight optimization, we propose a training strategy based on gradient descent optimization and dynamically adjusts weights by optimizing reconstruction loss. For anchor selection, we design a task-aware strategy that leverages error-correlation anchor refinement to identify more representative anchor subsets. Unlike existing methods, our framework capture evaluating sparsity directly from the model-item matrix without relying on additional embeddings. By integrating spectral clustering with gradient- based optimization, our approach accurately predicts model performance using a minimal number of anchor points. Our experiments show that compared to traditional full-dataset evaluation, our method can reduce inference costs to only 100 instances while maintaining low estimate errors and highly consistent performance estimates. LIMA (Zhou et al., 2023) demonstrates that a large language model can be effectively 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 aligned using only 1,000 high-quality examples, as most of the model’s knowledge is obtained during pretraining. LIMR (Li et al., 2025) argues that in the context of reinforcement learning for LLM training, a small but strategically curated dataset can outperform significantly larger ones. LIMO (Ye et al., 2025) further shows that strong mathematical reasoning capabilities can be elicited from a knowledge-rich LLM by fine-tuning it on just 800 high-quality examples, surpassing models trained on datasets more than 100 times larger. Several methods have been proposed to reduce evaluation costs by selecting a subset of models or items, while closely aligning with the original benchmark in terms of both accuracy and ranking—a field often referred to as Efficient LLM Evaluation. 3 LLM EVALUATION CAN BESPARSE In this section, we first discuss the evalution sparsity in current benchmarks by revisiting the model- item performance matrix. 3.1 EVALUATINGSPARSITY INLLM BENCHMARKS Given a model-item score matrix S∈ {−1,1}m×n, where m and n denote the number of models and items respectively, and where Si,j = 1indicates a correct prediction and Si,j =−1 indicates an incorrect one. Linear FormulationWhen f is a linear function, it can be absorbed by W and we can derive the objective of all previous methods (Polo et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2025), which directly selects a sparse subset of items whose weighted average matches the full benchmark score. minimize W ∥SW−SW a∥1 subject to∥W∥ 0 ≤k .(2) 4 METHODOLOGY In this section, we first describe the anchor weight predictor for pre-selected anchors in an end-to-end optimization. We then discuss the initialization and refinement strategy of anchors in SparseEval. given a fixed set of anchor points, we aim to find an appropriate method for assigning weights to these anchors for perfomance estimation. Traditional methods, such as TinyBenchmark (Polo et al., 2024), typically train an Item Response Theory (IRT) model and then apply k-means clustering to the resulting IRT representations in order to identify anchor points. The weights of these anchors are subsequently assigned based on the distribution of the clusters. Therefore, it becomes possible to directly optimize the anchor weights via gradient descent by minimizing a reconstruction loss. Prediction matrix S∈ {−1,1}m×n, number of anchors k, refinement steps R, learning rateη, proxy training epochsE, final training epochsF 1:Anchor Selection and Refinement: Train a proxy MLP fr on current anchors A with E epochs to predict overall model perfor- mance 5:Compute prediction residuals:ein Eq. Train final MLP model f on selected anchors A with F epochs to predict overall model perfor- mance 17:Return final trained MLP modelfand anchor setA Formally, let W denote the given sparse weight factor (∥W∥ 0 ≤k ), Wa the ground-truth uniform averaging weights, and Strain ∈R M×n the training score matrix over M examples and n items. L= 1 M f(S train ⊙(1 M W ⊤))−S trainWa 2 (3) 4.2 ANCHORINITIALIZATION Based on our earlier observations, we find that most datasets exhibit strong intra-cluster similarity, which motivates us to initialize anchor points directly by k-means clustering. For each dataset, we evaluate both k-means and random initialization on a small set of models as the validation set and choose the better method for the final initialization. However, neither method participates in the end-to-end optimization process based on reconstruction loss, and the anchors remain fixed after initialization. Two essential components naturally emerge from end-to-end training with reconstruction loss and backpropagation:errorsandgradients. This is especially useful in the context of fast-training proxy models, where the absolute gradient is often a more direct indicator of impact on the error than the weight activation from the first layer. AfterR refinement steps, we train a final MLP model which sharing the same architecture but with a different number of input features as the final model. 5.2 MAINRESULTS In Table 1, we compare our method with several baselines, including Anchor Points (Vivek et al., 2023), gp-IRT (Polo et al., 20