REAL METHOD of "Infinite Horizon Markov Economies" (arXiv 2502.16080v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Finally, going beyond Arrow and Debreu, we introduce a solution method for Markov pseudo-games, and prove its polynomial-time convergence. We show that under suitable assumptions, the solutions of any infinite horizon Markov exchange economy (i.e., recursive Radner equilibria—RRE) can be formulated as the solution to a concave Markov pseudo-game, thus establishing the existence of RRE, and providing first-order methods for approximating RRE. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in practice by building the corresponding generative adversarial policy neural network, and using it to compute RRE in a variety of infinite-horizon Markov exchange economies. Mathematically, the key difference between a static and a stochastic economy is that consumers in a stochastic economy face a collection of budget constraints, one per time-step, rather than only one. Financial and macroeconomists stepped up, however, with financial economists seeking to further develop the theoretical aspects of stochastic economies (see, for instance, Magill and Quinzii (2002)), and macroeconomists seeking practical methods by which to solve stochastic economies in order to determine the impact of various policy choices (via simulation; see, for instance, Sargent and Ljungqvist (2000)). Assuming parameterized policies, and taking advantage of the recent progress on solving generative adversarial learning problems (e.g., (Lin et al., 2020; Daskalakis et al., 2020)), we show that a policy profile which is a stationary point of the exploitability (i.e., the players’ cumulative maximum regret) can be computed in polynomial time under mild assumptions (Theorem 3.2). As our theoretical computational guarantees apply to policies represented by neural networks, we obtain the first, to our knowledge, deep reinforcement learning algorithm with theoretical guarantees for general-sum games. S × A−i ⇒ Ai, which takes as input the current state s(t) and the other players’ actions a(t) −i ∈ A−i, and outputs a subset of the ith player’s action space Ai. For any history h = ((s(t), a(t))τ −1 t=0 , s(τ )) of length τ ∈ N, we denote by h:τ ′ the first τ ′ ∈ [τ ∗] steps of h, i.e., h:τ ′ = ((s(t), a(t))τ ′−1 t=0 , s(τ ′)). 7 Goktas Now, given a policy profileπ ∈ P, we define the state-value function vπ : The exploitability minimization method we introduce can indeed compute such an approximate stationary point in polynomial time: Furthermore, asymptotically, our method is guaranteed to converge to an exact stationary point of exploitability. 9 Goktas More precisely, following Goktas and Greenwald (2022), who minimize exploitability to solve for variational equilibria in (one-shot) pseudo-games, we first formulate our problem as the quasi-optimization problem of minimizing exploitability,10 and then transform this problem into a coupled min-max optimization (i.e., a two-player zero-sum game) whose objective is cumulative regret, rather than the potentially ill-behaved exploitability. Under suitable parametrization, such problems are amenable to polynomial-time solutions via simultaneous gradient descent ascent (Arrow et al., 1958), assuming the objective is Lipschitz smooth in both players’ decision variables and gradient dominated in the inner player’s. first, a fixed point computation is required to solve the outer player’s minimization problem; second, the inner player’s policy space depends on the choice of outer policy. 3.3.2 Policy Parameterization In a coupled min-max optimization problem, any solution to the inner player’s maximization problem is implicitly parameterized by the outer player’s decision. S ×RΩ → Afor the outer player, and an unconstrained parameter space RΣ and parametric policy profile function ρ : First, the unconstrained parameter space facilitates an efficient representation of the outer player’s policy space, i.e., the set of fixed points {π ∈ Pmarkov | π ∈ F markov(π)}. Second, the parameterization provides an explicit representation of the class of dependent policies, thereby eliminating the dependence of the inner player’s policy space on the outer player’s policy. Now, given an unconstrained parameter space, we are able to simplify our definition of (ε, δ)-stationary point of exploitability, namely, a policy parameter ω∗ ∈ RΩ for which there exists a δ-close policy parameter ω† ∈ RΩ with ∥ω∗ − ω†∥≤ δ s.t. 11 Goktas 3.3.3 State Exploitability Minimization Returning to our objective, namely state exploitability minimization, we now turn our attention to obtaining a tractable characterization of this goal. In fact, we can strengthen this probabilistic equivalence to a deterministic one by restricting our attention to Markov pseudo-games with bounded best-response mismatch coefficients. 3.3.4 Algorithmic Assumptions We are nearly ready to describe our reinforcement learning algorithm for computing a stationary point of Equation (7), and thereby finding a policy profile that satisfies the necessary conditions of a GMPE. As Equation (7) is a two-player zero-sum game, our method is a variant of simultaneous gradient descent ascent (GDA) (Arrow et al., 1958), meaning it adjusts its parameters based on first-order information until it reaches a (first-order) stationary point. 3.3.5 Algorithm and Convergence Finally, we present our algorithm for finding an approximate stationary point of exploitability, and thus state exploitability. The algorithm we use is two time-scale stochastic simultaneous gradient descent-ascent (TTSSGDA), first analyzed by Lin et al. Under this assumption, we estimate these values using realized trajectories from the history distri- bution h ∼ νω µ induced by the outer player’s policy, and the deviation history distribution hσ ∼ ×i∈[n] ν (σi(ω−i),ω−i) µ induced by the inner player’s policy. We now state our main theorem, namely that, under the assumptions outlined above, Algorithm 1 computes values for the policy parameters that nearly satisfy the necessary conditions for an MGPNE in polynomially many gradient steps, or equivalently, calls to the differentiable simulator. If Algorithm 1 is run with inputs that satisfy ηω , ησ ≍ poly(ε, ∥∂δ π∗ µ /∂µ∥∞, 1 1−γ , ℓ−1 ∇Ψ, ℓ−1 Ψ ), then there exists T ∈ poly  ε−1, (1 − γ)−1, ∥∂δ π∗ µ /∂µ∥∞, ℓ∇Ψ, ℓΨ, diam(RΩ × RΣ), η−1 ω  and k ≤ T s.t. In other words, by running Algorithm 1 on M, we compute a policy profile ω (T ) best in the neighborhood of ω∗, an approximate stationary point of exploitability. Moreover, our experiments