REAL METHOD of "FZOO: Fast Zeroth-Order Optimizer for Fine‑Tuning Large Language Models towards Adam‑Scale Speed" (arXiv 2506.09034v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Zeroth-order (ZO) optimizers avoid this cost by estimating gradients only from forward passes, yet existing methods like MeZO usually need tens of times more steps to converge. On the one hand, FZOO reduces the total forward passes needed for convergence by employing batched one-sided estimates that adapt step-sizes based on the standard deviation of batch losses. This creates the memory wall that now limits model training in resource-constrained scenarios. Existing ZO methods, however, use inefficient fixed step-sizes for LLM fine-tuning. Theoretically, one Adam step is twice as fast as a MeZO step (Adam’s backward pass takes roughly three times longer than a forward pass [1], making Adam equivalent to four forward passes versus MeZO’s two). First, it reduces total convergence passes by employing batched one-sided estimates, where the standard deviation of batch losses informs an adaptive step-size rule. First-order adaptive methods Standard LLM optimizers include SGD and its refinements [ 13] like Adam [20], which uses memory-intensive momentum for its adaptive step-sizes. Inspiringly, methods like normalized-SGD [ 2] also adapt steps effectively, often rivaling Adam’s performance but crucially without this significant momentum overhead, offering a key insight for our work. However, all these first-order methods share a fundamental drawback: Zeroth-order optimizers ZO methods sidestep back-prop by estimating gradients with only forward passes. Batch-based zeroth-order optimizers A batch-oriented refinement of ZO methods estimates gra- dients by evaluating a batch of forward step. 3 Methods In the following, we first briefly review the classical zeroth -order gradient estimator employed in MeZO (Section 3.1). We then present the complete workflow of our FZOO optimizer (Section 3.2), shown in Figure 2, introduce a parallel perturbation strategy that accelerates computation (Section 3.3), and finally offer a theoretical analysis of the proposed method (Section 3.4, 3.5). EstimategradientBitPerturb 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔𝟏 𝑢!~Uniform({+1,−1}) 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔𝟐 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔𝒏 ··· ··· 𝜃−𝜀𝑢$ Layer_1 Input 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔𝟏 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔𝟐 ……Layer_2Layer_NLayer_1 Layer_2Layer_N FZOO Fixed part(share) Perturbed part CalculationPer layer Figure 2: Sample batch B ⊂ D; obtain input X and first layer weights W (1) 9: F (j) ← W (j)Y (j−1) ▷ Compute unperturbed activations at layer j 16: P (j) ← ϵ(u ⊙ Y (j−1)) ▷ Compute perturbations at layer j 17: Y (j) ← F (j) + P (j) ▷ Compute perturbed activations in parallel at layer j 18: ℓ ← L(Y (f inal); B) ▷ Compute final losses in parallel 20: Let θ ∈ Rd denote all trainable parameters of the LLM, and let L(θ; B) be the empirical loss on B. Instead, FZOO dynamically tunes its step size using the standard deviation of loss values gathered from multiple forward passes within each mini-batch. That is, the gradient estimate gt is then computed by averaging N one-sided difference estimates gt = 1 ϵN NX i=1 (li − l0)ui. The equation 4 shows that FZOO receives larger steps at flat regions (where σt is small) and smaller steps at steep regions, mirroring Adam-style adaptivity while keeping memory at the inference level. 3.2.1 Movtivation of FZOO Adaptive first-order methods often estimate local curvature to scale updates. Similar adaptivity can be achieved by methods like normalized-SGD [ 2], which adjusts step sizes by normalizing the gradient, making it more memory-efficient compared to Adam. For the first layer we compute F (1) = W (1)X, Y (1) i = F (1) + ϵ (ui ⊙ X), i= 1, . For subsequent layers (j ≥ 2) we compute F (j) = W (j)Y (j−1), P (j) = ϵ (U ⊙ Y (j−1)), Y (j) = F (j) + P (j). Encoder–decoder mod- els—BERT [ 12], ALBERT [ 21], etc.—tackle language understanding and are trained with a masked-token objective (Section 4.1). Training loss curves when using MeZO and FZOO to fine-tune different LLMs on the BoolQ dataset. And its loss convergence speed is close to Adam, fully demonstrating FZOO’s excellent performance in training efficiency. As shown in Figure 3, FZOO not only achieves8× speedup over MeZO on average in the context of full parameter tuning, but also has lower training loss. 4.3 Training with Non-Differentiable Objectives Our proposed FZOO estimates the gradient by performing multiple forward propagation processes, so the objective function can be a non-differentiable function. Task(model) SNLI (RoBERTa-large) COPA (Phi-2) WIC (OPT-13B) CB (Llama3) FZOO 20× 10× 9× 8× Potential 40× 20× 18× 16× Time Efficiency Adaptive step-size scheduling delivers up to 20× speed-up in total steps over MeZO (Table 6). As shown in Figure 6, increasing the number of perturbations N per step can improve accuracy under certain hyperparameter settings, but also raises per-step computational cost. A memory efficient ran- domized subspace optimization method for training large language models. 13 A Related Works A.1 First-order Optimizer Used in LLMs In the development of deep learning, various optimization algorithms have been proposed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of model training. Early methods include gradient descent (GD) and its improved versions, momentum method, Adagrad [ 13] and ADADELTA [46]. These methods have their own characteristics, but they have played an indispensable role in promoting technological progress in key fields such as computer vision. As the scale of models rapidly expands, the number of parameters surges, and the structure becomes increasingly complex, the applicability of traditional optimization methods in large model training has been severely tested. To address this phenomenon, LAMB [ 45] was proposed, which uses a principled layer-wise adaption strategy to accelerate the training of large-scale models under substantial batch sizes. Although these methods have their own characteristics, rough experiments conducted by [48] show that SPSA outperforms other methods. MeZO [28] is the first to apply the classical ZO-SGD algorithm for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs), achieving competitive performance while significantly reducing memory usage and GPU time. First, we have E [⟨∇L(θt), −τt⟩] ≤ ∥∇L(θt)∥2 + E ∥τt∥2 2 equation 18 ≤ ∥∇L(θt)∥2 2 + d3L2ϵ2 8N , (20) where the first inequality is because of the Cauchy’s inequality. Sample batch B ⊂ D; obtain input X and first layer weights W (1) 15: F (j) ← W (j)Y (j−1) ▷ Compute unperturbed activations at layer j 22: