REAL METHOD of "SophiaVL-R1: Reinforcing MLLMs Reasoning with Thinking Reward" (arXiv 2505.17018v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In light of this, we propose SophiaVL-R1, as an attempt to add reward signals for the thinking process in this paradigm. To achieve this, we first train a thinking reward model that evaluates the quality of the entire thinking process. Given that the thinking reward may be unreliable for certain samples due to reward hacking, we propose the Trust-GRPO method, which assigns a trustworthiness weight to the thinking reward during training. This weight is computed based on the thinking reward comparison of responses leading to correct answers versus incorrect answers, helping to mitigate the impact of potentially unreliable thinking rewards. Moreover, we design an annealing training strategy that gradually reduces the thinking reward over time, allowing the model to rely more on the accurate rule-based outcome reward in later training stages. In particular, DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025) exemplifies the success of applying the GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) reinforcement learning algorithm to incentive strong reasoning with long Chain-of- Thought (CoT) in LLMs. The key of these methods is to utilize a rule-based function that yields accurate outcome reward signals for RL training (Guo et al., 2025; Leng et al., 2025; Deng et al., 2025b). During GRPO training (Shao et al., 2024), the rule-based outcome reward will equally encourage these responses with correct answers, regardless of whether the underlying thinking process is sound or flawed. Therefore, BA = BC …… BA is given as 20, so BC is also 20. This gives rise to one intuitive thought:Can we incorporate a reward for the thinking process during GRPO training to explicitly guide correct reasoning? To explore this question, we proposeSophiaVL-R1, an MLLM that enhances reasoning by integrating model-generated thinking rewards with rule-based outcome rewards in RL training. Given that typical process reward models (PRMs) impose rigid step-wise constraints on reasoning and can be overly exploited (e.g., generating meaningless or repetitive steps), we measure the quality of the thinking process at aholisticlevel rather than at thesteplevel. Specifically, we introduce a thinking reward model trained on annotated reasoning responses collected from GRPO training trajectories. This model evaluates intermediate reasoning quality based on criteria such as logical soundness, consistency across steps, and redundancy in the thinking process. Moreover, considering that the model-generated thinking rewards may be unreliable for certain cases (Ye et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a), we propose theTrust-GRPOtraining algorithm to reduce the risks of reward hacking (Skalse et al., 2022). A lower trustworthiness weight is assigned when high thinking rewards are abnormally given to reasoning processes that lead to incorrect answers, indicating that the reward signal may be unreliable. Unlike previous uncertainty estimation methods such as MC Dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), which usually require multiple samplings for a single response—an approach that can be computationally prohibitive for MLLMs—our method introduces no additional cost by leveraging information from the response group within GRPO. Furthermore, an annealing schedule is introduced to gradually reduce the influence of the thinking reward throughout training, allowing the model to increasingly rely on the more reliable and accurate rule-based outcome reward in later stages. • We propose a thinking reward model that evaluates reasoning quality from various di- mensions at a holistic level, enabling the model to distinguish between sound and flawed reasoning processes during rule-based RL training. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • We introduce the Trust-GRPO algorithm, which assigns a trustworthiness weight to thinking rewards based on their reliability. This method guides the model to explore favorable reasoning policies in a trustworthy manner without extra computational overhead. ReST-MCTS* (Zhang et al., 2024a) integrates process supervision and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to generate per-step process rewards, enabling efficient self-training of both policy and reward models without manual annotation. Earlier methods typically depend on fine-grained step-level supervision or learned reward models to guide the reasoning process (Yao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025b; Zang et al., 2025). 3 METHOD 3.1 DATASETCOMPOSITION We curate a dataset SophiaVL-R1-130k, comprising 130k examples to support the training of thinking reward model (Section 3.2) and SophiaVL-R1 (Section 3.4). To construct the dataset used for training the thinking reward model, we collected 470,331 (question, response ) pairs output by Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025) during the GRPO training on the SophiaVL-R1-130k dataset. The thinking reward model, initialized with Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025), is then trained on this dataset using SFT, where the model is required to output a thinking reward given a question and its corresponding thinking process. Through this training, the thinking reward model learns to identify diverse reasoning errors and assign appropriate rewards accordingly, thereby playing a crucial role in GRPO training by providing feedback on reasoning quality. To deal with this challenge, we introduce the Trust-GRPO algorithm, as illustrated in Figure 3. The trustworthiness is computed by contrasting the thinking reward Rt assigned to responses that arrive at correct answers with those leading to incorrect ones. Ri =R o i +γαe − steps T ·R t i,(5) where steps denotes the current global training step and T is the total number of training steps, controlling the decay rate of thinking reward’s influence over time. The reasoning model is initialized from Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct and trained on SophiaVL- R1-130k with the Trust-GRPO algorithm. RL training is performed for 1,500 steps using a VeRL (Zheng et al., 2025; Sheng et al., 2024)-based implementation on 8 NVIDIA A800 80GB GPUs. 5 ABLATIONSTUDY We conduct ablation studies to examine the contributions of key components in our method. replacing the trained thinking reward model with an untrained Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct model. Training curves of mean rule-based outcome reward across different methods. In contrast, our trained thinking reward model substantially improves the model performance, which highlights its importance in our method. Training Curve Analysis.Figure 5 shows the mean outcome reward per training step for each method.