REAL METHOD of "RECON: Robust symmetry discovery via Explicit Canonical Orientation Normalization" (arXiv 2505.13289v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This layer can be attached on top of any pre-trained model to infuse group invariance, improving its performance without retraining. Figure 1:(a)Class-pose methods assign arbitrary (often out-of-distribution) canonicals per class.(b) This leads to distinct relative-pose distributions ν[x], obscuring the shared ±30◦ symmetries.RECON corrects these offsets, mapping inputs under the same symmetries to thesamedistribution µ[x] and extracting theirnatural pose γ.(c)Our data-aligned canonicalization removes symmetry-induced distribution shifts, improving downstream performance of pre-trained backbones without architectural restrictions or retraining. Lastly, we provide practical applications in (i) OOD pose detection and (ii) test-time canonicalization, a drop-in method to grant group invariance to frozen pre-trained models, improving downstream performance (Sec. We proposeRECON, a method for discovery of instance-specific pose distributions from unlabeled data leveraging class-pose representation learning methods. We offer applications in OOD pose detection and test-time canonicalization, offering performance improvements to pre-trained backbones via a simple plug-in canonicalization step. 2 PRELIMINARIES Our approach leverages class-pose decomposition methods, a class of neural networks designed to disentangle input data into an invariant (class) component and an equivariant (pose) component based on a given transformation group G. 2 Invariant component z and canonical representation ˆx First, a G-invariantencoder η:X → Z ⊆Rn learns an invariant representation z=η(x) . All the IE-AE components (η, δ, ψ) are then trained jointly by minimizing the reconstruction loss d(ρX (ψ(x))δ(η(x)), x),3 whereρ X is the group action ofGonX. Our method leverages these components, specifically the distribution of relative transformations g=ψ(x) and the invariant latent spaceZ, to discover the specific distribution of transformations that appear in the data. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 findings indicating that deep features correctly capture perceptual and semantic similarity, even when learned without supervision (Zhang et al., 2018).4 Formally, let η:X → Zbe such a G-invariant encoder, we then define an equivalence relation ∼ε in Xbased on connected proximity inZ: The subsequent section details our method for achieving this by normalizing the arbitrarily offset outputs of IE-AEs. Trained IE-AE (η, δ, ψ), input x, number of neighborsk 1:Compute invariant embedding:z←η(x) 2: ψ′([x])← {gi ˆΓ−1 [x] |g i ∈ψ([x])} 7:returnψ ′([x])▷Samples approximatingµ [x] Interpretation.Proposition 3.1 provides a practical method for consistently retriev- ing µ[x] throughcanonical orientation normalization, outlined in practice in Al- gorithm 1. 3.3 INFERRING SYMMETRIES VIA LEARNED MAPPINGS Algorithm 1 provides a way to estimate the symmetry distribution and the centering transformation for any classin the training data. 4 RELATED WORK Class-pose decomposition methodsUnsupervised learning of disentangled invariant and equiv- ariant representations via autoencoders or other learning paradigms has seen various propositions (Shu et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019; Feige, 2019; Kosiorek et al., 2019; Koneripalli et al., 2020; Winter et al., 2021; 2022; Yokota & Hontani, 2022). Our main contribution is the discovery of the transformations in the data via an invariant latent space search coupled with an explicit canonical orientation normalization step (Proposition 3.1), which corrects the pose offset introduced by arbitrary canonicals typical of class-pose decomposition methods like the IE-AE. While they can compute a class-dependent “equivariance error”, this method does not expose a clear symmetry distribution for each input. This approach learns a sin- gle set of transformations per layer, while our method discovers instance-level symmetry distributions instead. In contrast to these methods, our approach discoversinstance-specificdistributions of symmetries over a group G and a data-aligned canonicalization function without supervision, rather than discovering a dataset-level (sub)group G itself. We emphasize that our method is complementary and a continuation to this line of work: Spatial Transformer Networks (STN) (Jaderberg et al., 2015) learn an input-dependent geometric warp via a small network which can be seen as a group-free form of canonicalization, but it is typically trained end-to-end with a discriminative objective and requires joint training with the predictor. In a similar fashion, Affine Steerable EquivarLayer (Li et al., 2025) learns a canonicalizer trained independently of the pre-trained model, but we note that it is trained using known random transforms, i.e. Concretely, we canonicalize inputs at test time via a canonicalization layer defined as C(x) =ρ X (Λ(x)·ψ(x) −1)x , and feed the canonicalized sample to the pre-trained model; becauseRECONaligns inputs to the training data distribution of poses (visualized in Fig. We improve consistently over the base- line and offer competitive (MNIST) or better performance (FashionMNIST, GEOM-QM9) against other test-time canonicalization methods such as EquiAdapt (Mondal et al., 2023), while noting that our canonicalization is trained without supervision, whereas EquiAdapt’s canonicalization is trained end-to-end using class labels. Notably, in the imaging domain, our method consistently outperforms equivariance-learning architectures (SE(2) Partial G-CNNs (Romero & Lohit, 2022)) sometimes by a large margin (67.72% vs 81.96% in FashionMNIST), and stay competitive (MNIST) or even surpass (FashionMNIST) fully equivariant architectures ( SE(2)-equivariant Steerable CNNs (Cesa et al., 2022)) (cf. Note that arbitrary canonicalizations from class-pose methods (e.g., IE-AE, SGM) map inputs to OOD poses and therefore degrade performance; benefits from these canonical- izations arise only when they are also applied at training time, thus requiring backbone retraining. D.3 ANALYSIS OF EQUIVALENCE CLASS DEFINITION To quantitatively assess the quality of the computed equivalence classes[x], we introduce ahit rate metric that, for each x∈ X, measures the proportion of k-nearest neighbors in the computation of [x] that belong to the same molecular class (SMILES) as x. (i) a (one time) pseudo-label generation step based on k-nearest neighbors (Algorithm 1), (ii) training of Θ and Λ (computation and implementation details in Appendix E) and (iii) the downstream