REAL METHOD of "Hallucination Begins Where Saliency Drops" (arXiv 2601.20279v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To bridge this gap, we introduceLVLMs-Saliency, angradient-aware diagnostic toolthat quantifies the grounding strength of each output token by fusing attention weights with their gradients. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly reduces hallucinations across multiple LVLMs, offering a robust and interpretable solution to improve model reliability. (2024) or training-free methods Neo & Chen (2024); Li et al. As illustrated in Figure 1, it is nearly impossible to discern meaningful patterns in attention maps that 1 arXiv:2601.20279v1 [cs.CV] 28 Jan 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Figure 1:Attention vs. Attention maps remain visually similar, but saliency maps collapse, signaling loss of contextual dependency. Adapting this insight to the autoregressive generation setting of LVLMs, we propose anunsupervised metric called LVLMs-Saliency, defined as the element-wise product of attention weights and their corresponding gradients. which reveals a breakdown in contextual grounding that attention-only methods fail to capture. Unlike previous methods of intervening in image attention (Zhang et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2024d; Jiang et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2025a;b) to alleviate hallucinations, we focus exclusively on the dynamics ofoutput token saliencyduring autoregressive generation. caused by context loss when the model outputs tokens, we propose a dual-intervention approach in the inference phase that incorporates saliency: LocoRE strengthens the attention weights from the current query token to the most recent ws output tokens, using a distance-aware gain factor γ(P) j = 1 +β·I((P−j)≤w s). With extensive experiments, our method demonstrates significant hallucination-mitigating performance across different LVLMs on image hallucination and generation benchmarks, proving its effectiveness. • We introduce Saliency-Guided Rejection Sampling (SGRS), the first inference-time mechanism that dynamically filters candidate tokens based on their saliency with respect to prior output context. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • We introduce Local Coherence Reinforcement (LocoRE), a lightweight, plug-and-play module that strengthens attention from the current token to its most recent ws predecessors. Unlike prior methods that rebalance cross-modal attention, LocoRE operates purely within the output stream. 2 ANALYSIS ANDMOTIVATION 2.1 HALLUCINATIONTOKENSALIENCYANALYSIS We propose a gradient-based attention analysis framework for quantifying token-level hallucination saliency in autoregressive language models. (y,{A (l,h)}L,H l=1,h=1, s) =M(x),(1) where A(l,h) ∈[0,1] n×n denotes the attention weight matrix at layer l∈ {1, . The gradient of the loss with respect to attention matrices is computed as: ∇A(l,h) = ∂L ∂A(l,h) ∈R n×n.(3) The saliency matrix S(l,h) ∈R n×n for each attention head is obtained through the Hadamard product followed by triangular masking: The layer-wise normalized saliency ¯S(l) ∈R n×n is computed by averaging across attention heads and applyingℓ 2-normalization: 3 METHODOLOGY 3.1 SALIENCY-GUIDEDREJECTIONSAMPLING(SGRS) SGRS dynamically evaluates the grounding quality of each candidate token before commitment; the complete algorithm is formalized in Algorithm 1. For each ci ∈ C(P) , we compute its hallucination saliency S(c i) as: 3.1.1 LOCALCOHERENCEREINFORCEMENT(LOCORE) While SGRS ensures token-level grounding, LocoRe addresses sequence-level context drift by explicitly reinforcing attention dependencies among output tokens, the complete algorithm is formalized in Algorithm 2. Let A(P+1) ∈ RB×nh×(P+1)×(P+1) denote the attention weight matrix computed during the forward pass for position P+ 1 . The modified attention weights are then used in the softmax and weighted sum operations of the self- attention mechanism, ensuring that the model’s prediction for token P+1 is more strongly grounded in its recent output history. SGRS filters and selects the current token xP based on its saliency to prior outputs; LocoRE then modifies the attention weights used in thenextforward pass (for position P+ 1 ) to reinforce dependencies on recent tokens. (2) 9:ifS(c)≥τthen 10:x P ←c , H.append(S(c)), accepted← True,break 11:else 12:C ← C \ {c} 13:end if 14:end for 15:ifnot acceptedthen 16:x P ←arg maxc∈originalC S(c)▷Fallback: attention weights for stepP+ 1 2:S= 35, I= 576 : modified attention weights for step P+ 1 4:P←current position▷Last generated token position 5:t←P−(S+I) 6:ift≤0then returnA (P+1) 7:end if▷No output yet 8:J P ← {j|S+I≤j < P}▷ Historical output positions 9:ifJ P =∅then returnA (P+1) 10:end if 11:for allj∈ J P do 12:d j ←P−j ▷Distance to current position 13:γ j ←1 +β·I(d j ≤w s)▷Eq. (4) 16:end for 17:end for 18:returnA (P+1) 4 EXPERIMENTS 4.1 EXPERIMENTALSETUPS Baselines.To demonstrate the broad applicability of our method in LVLM architecture, we applied and evaluated the latest models, including LLaV A-v1.5-7/13B Liu et al. TAME allocates the attention on the system token to other tokens, but still ignores the visual information, while Vissink only intervenes with the visual attention sink and ignores the contextual association of the text output. Our method achieve a much higher score (corresponds to less hallucination) across all categories. (2024a) identifies that most hallucinations stem from the attention sink pattern marked by images in the attention matrix. Based on this insight, EAH proposes a method that enhances attention heads without additional training. (2025b) investigate the causes of hallucinations by analyzing local self-attention patterns of “anchor tokens” and defines the degree of attentional localization as the probability of token propagation. To this end, we introduce SGRS and LocoRE, a plug-and-play intervention that dynamically boosts visual attention and reinforces local coherence during text generation. A training-free method for alleviating hallucination in lvlms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21771, 2024d. Enhancing large language models without training through attention calibration.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15765, 2024. We can use a Taylor expansion to compute the saliency score for each element of the attention matrix: where Ah,l denotes the value of the attention matrix for the Ah,l attention head in layer l, and x denotes the input. L(x) is the loss function of the task, e.g., the cross-entropy of the quiz task objective. The saliency matrix Sl for layer l is obtained by averaging all heads 