REAL METHOD of "On Optimal Hyperparameters for Differentially Private Deep Transfer Learning" (arXiv 2510.20616v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Heikkilä1, Antti Honkela1 1Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland *Equal contribution {aki.rehn, linzh.zhao, mikko.a.heikkila, antti.honkela}@helsinki.fi ABSTRACT Differentially private (DP) transfer learning, i.e., fine-tuning a pretrained model on private data, is the current state-of-the-art approach for training large models under privacy constraints. We present a systematic study of how the optimal clipping bound C and batch size B vary— primarily with the privacy budget (ε), but also with other factors that affect the difficulty of the private fine-tuning task, such as the capability of the pretrained backbone and the amount of compute—inDP deep transfer learning. We propose a rule for selecting the optimal batch size under bounded compute (fixed epochs) through a combination of a lower bound on the number of optimisation steps and maximising the number of steps without increasing the total cumulative DP noise (Section 6). Each training iteration then contributes to the cumulative privacy loss. We focus on DP-Adam due to its widespread use, but the same principles apply to any first-order optimization method (McMahan et al., 2019). (2023) propose using a non-private model to identify the smallest C that slightly degrades utility, then applying this during private training, while Tobaben et al. Batch sizeOur work focuses on the bounded compute setting, which we implement through a bound on training epochs. This is in contrast to prior work mostly assuming a fixed number of training steps. (2022) show that without any other constraints, increasing the batch size monotonically increases accuracy over a broad range of values, but larger batches require more epochs and thus more compute. 4 METHODOLOGY ModelsFor image tasks, we employ Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) from the PyTorch Image Models library (Wightman, 2019), using ViT-Base and ViT-Tiny to represent high- and low-capability pretrained backbones, respectively. All image models for fine-tuning tasks are pretrained on ImageNet-21k (Ridnik et al., 2021) with the “AugReg” setup that includes multiple data augmentation methods as well as regularization methods (Steiner et al., 2022). Specifically, we use the feature-wise linear modulation (FiLM) parameterization (Perez et al., 2018) by freezing all the other parameters and train only the scale and bias of the normalization layers in addition to the classification head. Additionally, we include a 10% subset of CIFAR-100 to (i) study how scarcity of training data increases learning-problem difficulty, and (ii) analyze how models capable of overfitting the training dataset affect the clipping bound. For each dataset, we merge the validation split (if available) into the training set to maximize training data for each configuration. Cassava is an imbalanced plant disease classification dataset with 5 classes and ∼ 6k training examples, and is significantly out-of- distribution relative to the ImageNet-21k pretraining dataset. In the rest of this section, we first analyze how these two factors affecting problem difficulty, DP noise level and pretrained model capability, affect the optimal clipping bound, in Section 5.1 and Section 5.2, respectively. We again first state the assumptions and then give the theorem. Assumption 5.3.Assume an L-smooth loss function L (Definition E.1), and that we want to minimize L via gradient descent, using step size η≤ 1 L, and the per-sample clipped and noisy DP gradients ˜gt = P i ¯g(t) i +ξ (t) at stept= 1, . Theorem 5.4.Under Assumption 5.3, the expected improvement in the loss from step t to t+ 1 is bounded as E[L(θt+1)|θt]≤ L(θt)− η 2 ∥∇L(θt)∥2 2 + η 2 MSEt(C)(2) Proof.See Section E for a proof. Corollary 5.5.Under Assumption 5.3, minimizing MSE(C) minimizes the upper bound given in Theorem 5.4 for the expected per-step improvement in the loss function at any given stept. as we show in Corollary 5.5, under Assumption 5.3 using optimal clipping that minimizes MSE directly improves the bound on the per-step loss improvement. This re-weighting view to clipping explains why methods for tuning C based on optimizing the performance without DP noise to save compute (e.g., Ponomareva et al. 6 OPTIMAL BATCH SIZE DEPENDS ON PRIVACY AND COMPUTE BUDGETS We study how batch size affects model performance under limited compute, focusing on the fixed- epochs setting. Prior works (Ponomareva et al., 2023; Räisä et al., 2024) take a fixed-steps view and suggest tuning the batch size by finding the sweet spot when plotting the standard deviation of the DP noise in the averaged gradient, thereby finding the smallest batch size with (nearly) optimal per-step signal-to- noise ratio. This cumulative noise captures the total DP noise accumulated over training steps. We find that the cumulative noise, under the constraint of a minimum number of steps, can explain which batch sizes perform the best. 7 which shows that a minimum number of steps (indicated by the vertical dashed line at 20 steps in this case) is needed for good performance. For clipping bound, various factors such as tighter privacy budgets, less capable pretrained backbones and limited compute—which can be informally characterized as learning problem difficulty—cause a shift in the distribution of gradient norms: In batch size, we have focused on fixed-epoch training where compute constraints limit the total number of samples processed. We have demonstrated that existing guidelines for tuning the batch size that focus on fixed-steps setting where the required compute grows with batch size fail to provide useful guidance in this set- ting. Defaults often suppress the very gradients that matter most, or waste compute on high-variance updates when more steps could be taken at no extra privacy cost. A General Approach to Adding Differential Privacy to Iterative Training Procedures, 2019. InIEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, 2010. B EQUIVALENCE OF NORMALIZED VS.STANDARDDPUPDATES We analyze with thestandard(unnormalized) variant when clarity of the DP noise’s dependence on C is needed, and we train with thenormalizedvariant for simpler hyperparameter tuning. (2023), where we train only the scale and bias of normalization layers and the 15 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table A1: Following standard practice, we fine-tune language models with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021a), using rank 16 adapters on the quer