REAL METHOD of "INO-SGD: Addressing Utility Imbalance under Individualized Differential Privacy" (arXiv 2605.07930v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

ADDRESSINGUTILITYIMBALANCE UNDERINDIVIDUALIZEDDIFFERENTIALPRIVACY Xiao Tian1,2, Jue Fan1,2, Rachael Hwee Ling Sim1 & Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1 1Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore 2Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore {xiao.tian, jue.fan, rachael.sim}@u.nus.edu lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg ABSTRACT Differential privacy(DP) is widely employed in machine learning to protect confi- dential or sensitive training data from being revealed. However, exist- ing IDP algorithms induce a criticalutility imbalanceproblem:Data from own- ers with stronger privacy requirements may be severely underrepresented in the trained model, resulting in poorer performance on similar data from subsequent users during deployment. The core intu- ition behind DP is that personal information is protected if for any individual datumd, any dataset withdresults in a trained model that is almost indistinguishable from another model trained on the same dataset withoutdwith regards to a predeterminedprivacy budgetset by data owners. Then a potential attacker cannot tell for certain from the trained model whether an individual datum is present in the dataset. This leads to the next question:(II) Can we proactively correct thisIDP-induced utility imbalanceacross data owners?To address this, we propose theindividualized noisy ordered SGD(INO-SGD)algorithm in Sec. A randomizedalgorithmA:D →Ωtakes in a (training) datasetD∈ Dand returns a (randomized) output vectorω∈Ω⊆R r. The processed gradients are then summed up and perturbed by a Gaussian noise of0 r (r-sized zero vector) mean andσ 2Ir×r (r×ridentity matrix) variance whereσis thenoise scale. LetL(θ;D) := P d∈D ℓ(θ;d) be the optimization objective (empirical loss). Data imbalance refers to (†)the imbalance in sizes of different groups in the training set(hence in each sampled batch of gradient-based algorithms under uniform sampling), that is,|g 1|,|g 2|,· · ·,|gN |differ significantly. Data imbalance has two major negative impacts on gradient-based training algorithms such as SGD: Thus, when the loss for majority groupg 2 decreases, the loss for minority groupg 1 may not. The training process will focus more on reducing the expected lossE d∈g2 [ℓ(θ;d)]for majority groupg 2. Thus, under (I)DP we shouldfocus on the entire learning dynamics, which refers to the model utility for each group at every stage of training. 3 METHODOLOGY 3.1 IDP-INDUCEDUTILITYIMBALANCE We consider the setting where the training set still contains disjoint groups of datag 1,g 2,· · ·,gN with respective optimization objectivesL n(θ), but the training setDcan be fairly balanced and each group is of similar size. Similarly, the training focuses more on reducing the expected loss of BLUEthan REDand BOO occurs. 3.2 THEINO-SGD ALGORITHM Figure 3:Graphical illustration of the INO- SGD algorithm.At iterationt, a batchB t (e.g.,10data) is sampled. The gradients are computed and sorted by descending loss. Thus, at first glance, the solution should keep only the gradients with highest-µlosses or discard the gradients with smallest-µlosses. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 To exploit the order of losses2 while still preserving IDP, we devise a unique algorithm,individual- ized noisy ordered SGD(INO-SGD) (Fig. When a new datum is added, INO-SGD first ex- amines if its gradientg d is important based on the rank ofd’s loss. 8 4 0 4 8 1/4 training 2/4 training 0.5 2 3 4 5 8 4 0 4 8 3/4 training 0.5 2 3 4 5 4/4 training Privacy budget INO IDP recall (a) CIFAR-10. 4 0 4 1/4 training 2/4 training 1 4 7 10 4 0 4 3/4 training 1 4 7 10 4/4 training Privacy budget INO IDP recall (b) CIFAR-100. • an objective that better corrects for utility imbalance than average loss when minimized and is less affected by outliers with large loss than themaximal loss(Shalev-Shwartz & Wexler, 2016). if the model can reduce a larger individual loss (likely from a more private owner) by increasing another smaller individual loss (likely from a less private owner), the OW A loss decreases. In the context of (parametric) machine learning (ML), algorithmAcould refer to the training algorithm that outputs the vector of trained model parameters. If algorithmAis deterministic and always outputs the sameωgiven fixed input datasetD, then attackers can reconstruct the input datasetDby inverting algorithm A(e.g., throughmembership inference attack(Shokri et al., 2017) in ML), which threatens the privacy of data owners. Definition B.1(ϵ-DP (Dwork, 2006)).A randomized algorithmA:D →Ωsatisfiesϵ-differential privacy(ϵ-DP) if for any datumd, any pair of neighboring datasetsD, Dd ∈ Dsuch thatD△D d = 21 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 {d}, and every possible output setO⊆Ω, we have Pr[A(D)∈O]≤e ϵ ·Pr[A(D d)∈O],(3) whereϵ≥0is called theprivacy budgetof data owners orprivacy levelof algorithmA, which measures how private the algorithmAis. (2019) first identifies that if there exist underrepresented groups in the training set (i.e., (†) the training set is imbalanced), training with DP algorithms would make such groups even more underrepresented in the trained ML model, which is reflected as even lower accuracy/utility on data from such groups (thus the term “DP- exacerbated”). When a private datumdis added toB, if its loss is larger than the datum with9-th loss, it will be kept and the norm of change in the summed gradient is at mostC o(d); if its loss is smaller than the datum with9-th loss, it will be discarded and the original9-th datumd ′’s gradient will be kept instead of discarded. Theλ-level CVaR refers to the average loss when only the data with top100λ%losses remain in the dataset (i.e., 100λ%worst-case tail of losses) and the mixed CVaR represents a weighted average of CVaRs at differentλ∈(0,1](i.e., different severity of worst-case). • We also mentioned that the INO-SGD objective can be viewed as an objective that better corrects for utility imbalance than average loss when minimized and is less affected by outliers/noises with large loss than themaximal loss. To achieve this, one typical solution is to consider distributions of training data that are different from the training set itself and train a model that can minimize the maximum loss among all these distributions. For each dataset, we first split the training set intoNdisjoint subsets representing the datasets owned byNdata owners, in a way that data within each subset share similar traits and data across differe