REAL METHOD of "Triangle Multiplication is All You Need for Biomolecular Structure Representations" (arXiv 2510.18870v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce Pairmixer, a streamlined alternative that eliminates triangle attention while pre- serving higher-order geometric reasoning capabilities that are critical for structure prediction.Pairmixersubstantially improves computational efficiency, match- ing state-of-the-art structure predictors across folding and docking benchmarks, delivering up to 4× faster inference on long sequences while reducing train- ing cost by 34%. While triangle multiplication is implemented efficiently via matrix multiplications, triangle attention requires Lattention operations, introducing substantial memory and runtime overhead. 2 Preprint Input Embedder Sequences Diﬀusion Module MSKQNSDH TATAGGCA [Mg+2] StructureSingle Pair MSA Module Backbone Figure 2:Overview of Biomolecular Structure Prediction.Given a list of sequences, our model predicts the 3D folded structure of all sequences within a single complex. Input sequences are firstembeddedinto a single representation for each residue and a pair representation to capture the relationship between pairs of residues. TheMSA ModuleandBackbone(e.g., Pairformer) extracts deep pairwise features capturing inter-residue interactions, which are then passed to thediffusion moduleto generate the 3D structure. Attention-free Architectures.While transformers lead modern architectures, attention-free variants aim to improve scalability. FNet (Lee-Thorp et al., 2021) and related models (Poli et al., 2023; Zhai et al., 2021) replace attention with Fourier or convolutional mixing for sub-quadratic efficiency, while MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) achieves competitive performance using token- and channel-wise multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs).Pairmixerremoves attention entirely from the backbone and mixes tokens through matrix multiplication. 3 Preprint Triangle Multiplication Triangle Attention FFN z FFN Sequence Attention w/Pair Bias s (a)Pairformer architecture.The de facto biomolecular structure prediction backbone. The MSA Moduleencodes evolutionary information that is crucial for structure prediction (Benner & Gerloff, 1991; Yanofsky et al., 1964; Ovchinnikov et al., 2017; 2014; Morcos et al., 2011; Weigt et al., 2009). The MSA module takes (minit,z init) as input, extracts structurally-relevant evolutionary patterns from minit, and encodes pairwise interactions into zmsa to guide folding. Since processing all M sequences in the MSA is computationally expensive, AlphaFold3 introduced a shallow 4-layer MSA module after which the MSA is discarded while the evolutionary-aware pair representation zmsa continues to be refined. The Pairformer backboneserves as the primary feature extractor for AlphaFold3 (Abramson et al., 2024), producing structrually-aware representations that encode geometric constraints between residues (see Figure 3a). These modules treat the pair representation z∈R L×L×Cz as edge features of a fully-connected graph of L nodes and reason over triplets of residues (nodes) to learn geometric constraints. Triangle attentioncomputes attention (with pair bias) along every row (and column) of the pair representation. Formally, the update to rowiis T riAtt(z)i =softmax  (WQzi)(WKzi)⊤ +W Bz  WV zi where (WQ,W K,W V ) are standard attention projection matrices, and WB projects the pair repre- sentation into an attention bias term 1. For each edge zij, triangle multiplication computes how every nodekinteracts with query nodesiandjthrough edgesz ik andz jk. Triangle multiplication is more efficient, as it can be implemented with matrix multiplications (e.g., torch.einsum), whereas triangle attention incurs the higher cost of L full attention computations. While the Pairformer is trained with an auxiliary distogram loss that ensures zbackbone accurately represents all pairwise token distances, it does not yet specify an atomic 3-D structure. 4 METHOD We introducePairmixer, an attention-free feature extractor for biomolecular structure prediction and design (see Figure 3).Pairmixerexclusively updates the pair representation zmsa, leaving the single-sequence representation sinit unchanged. The full algorithmic specification ofPairmixeris available in Algorithm 1. However, the MSA Module in cofolding models now preprocesses the MSA and encodes this evolutionary information directly into the pair representation zmsa, eliminating the need for sequence updates to provide evolutionary information. 5 Preprint 50 100 150 0.48 0.56 0.64 0.72 Small 50 100 150 200 Medium 100 200 300 400 Large Training Time (GPU-days) Mean LDDT Pairmixer (Ours) Pairformer (Boltz-1) Transformer Figure 4:Performance curves on RCSB test set across model sizes.We compare three backbone architectures across three model sizes over training.Pairmixermatches or surpasses the Pairformer baseline while training more efficiently. Removing Triangle Attention.Triangle attention reasons over residue triplets by applying attention to each row of the pair representation zi, using the full z as pairwise bias (see Figure 11b). How- ever, this approach is computationally expensive, requiringL separate attention operations over L tokens per layer. More specifically, we replace the Pairformer backbone withPairmixerand remove triangle attention from the MSA Module. Note that we do not alter the diffusion module’s transformer architecture. To ensure this baseline is as strong as possible, we modify the architecture to allow features to flow effectively from the MSA module into the diffusion module (see Section A.2). Following Boltz-1 training schedule (Wohlwend et al., 2024), we train on 384/3456 token/atom crops for the first 53k iterations using the PDB and OpenFold distillation dataset. To evaluate the generality of our approach, we train models of multiple sizes. Our large configuration matches Boltz-1, with 48 Pairformer layers and 24 diffusion transformer layers. In addition, we develop small and medium variants with 12/24 Pairformer layers and 6/24 diffusion transformer layers, respectively. During inference, we default to 10 recycling steps and 200 sampling steps for all models. We additionally extend training for small and mediumPairmixerand Transformer models until the total training time matches the Pairformer. ∗Since we do not train a confidence model, results are reported using the first prediction. The Sequence Updatefirst performs attention with pair bias (see Figure 11a) and then applies a feed-forward network. At layerl, we compute the update ˜sl+1 =s l +AttnWithPairBias(s l,z l) sl+