REAL METHOD of "Rethinking JEPA: Compute‑Efficient Video Self-Supervised Learning with Frozen Teachers" (arXiv 2509.24317v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Concretely, we (i) train a target encoder with a simple pixel-reconstruction objective under V-JEPA masking, then (ii) freeze it and train a student to predict the teacher’s latents on masked regions. at matched pretraining FLOPs, our method achieves higher probing accuracy, and its scaling curves dominate V -JEPA’s accuracy–FLOPs Pareto frontier. Among these methods, Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA)-based methods (LeCun, 2022) have demonstrated a strong ability to learn powerful semantic features that perform well on downstream image (I-JEPA) (Assran et al., 2023) and video (V-JEPA) (Bardes et al., 2024; Assran et al., 2025) tasks. As concrete instantiations of the Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA), I-JEPA (Assran et al., 2023) and V-JEPA (Bardes et al., 2024; Assran et al., 2025) are masking-based pretraining methods that learn powerful semantic representation by predicting masked-out portions of the input in a learned embedding space. Specifically, these methods consist of a context (student) encoder and a predictor that are trained to make predictions that match the embeddings provided by a target (teacher) encoder. We propose a significantly simplified pretraining recipe that replaces the momentum teacher with a frozen encoder. (i) train a target encoder with a pixel-reconstruction objective under V-JEPA–style masking; (ii) freeze this encoder and train a student with the JEPA objective to predict the teacher’s latents on masked regions (Bardes et al., 2024). at matchedFLoatingPointOperations (FLOPs) and wall -clock, and even when accounting for the cost of training the teacher, our method achieves a better accuracy–FLOPs trade-off1. Interpretable model selection.Our design yields a student loss that provides an informative, training-time metric that correlates strongly with downstream accuracy under the frozen-backbone protocol, in contrast to EMA-based methods that require proxy heuristics for model selection. 2 Method Overview We first review video-based JEPA models that include both V-JEPA and V-JEPA 2, and then describe our simple approach named SALT for representation learning from videos. Note that V-JEPA 2 uses the same pretraining method described in V-JEPA but employs updated hyperparameters so our method review applies to both models. min θ,ϕ Ex,y∥gϕ(fθ(x), δy)−stop_grad( ¯fθ(y))∥1 (2.1) 1FLOPs and total number of training steps are used interchangeably to refer to compute. The frozen teacher encoder is obtained viaStage 1(not pictured above) by training using a pixel reconstruction objective. 2.2 Static-teacher Asymmetric Latent Training (SALT) - A Simplified Video Representation Learning Method The V-JEPA method uses a self-distillation approach incorporating stop-gradient and exponential moving average (EMA). • Stage 1 -The teacher or target encoder is trained to optimize a pixel reconstruction objective in Stage 1. The simplification described above results in two loss objectives that are proper loss functions which are easier to interpret in practice, and are immune to representation collapse by design. Moreover, our two- stage approach completely decouples the teacher and student architectures, unlocking considerable compute efficiency gains through the use of small teachers to train larger students, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 1. We provide a simple recipe to train the teacher inStage 1with method that we call V-Pixel that uses a pixel reconstruction objective2 along with the multi-block masking method described in V-JEPA. Note that our training dataset differs from the training datasets used in V-JEPA and V-JEPA 2 as the latter methods use Howto100M (Miech et al., 2019) and YT-Temporal-1B datasets (Zellers et al., 2022) while we use a subset of Panda70M in V-3.6M. In other words, the total number of steps for Stage 1 and Stage 2 is identical to the number of steps used by baseline methods. The comparison includes several baselines including encoders trained with V-JEPA 2 method on our V-3.6M dataset. The V-JEPA 2 encoders trained on V3.6M and SALT encoders are evaluated using the protocol in Section 3 and Section D. SALT at matched total steps on V-3.6M.Both methods are trained on the same V-3.6M dataset for an identical number of pretraining steps. encoders trained with our method exceeds the performance of V-JEPA 2 across all scales and remains highly competitive with other state-of-the-art methods including the recently proposed Perception Encoder. We train both methods for a total of 240k steps in this study. Figure 2a shows the downstream performance results of this study for ViT-L-based teacher and student model setup while Figure 2b shows the scaling behavior of the two methods as we scale up the student encoder while using a teacher encoder that is the same size or smaller than the student. R2 = 0.984 Figure 3Correlation between student loss and downstream accuracy.Observe that the student model’s training loss is predictive of downstream accuracy. SALT enables interpretable model selectionA key challenge with using joint-embedding methods including JEPA is that the training loss is typically uninformative of representation quality. T op-1 Accuracy (%) 59.8 72.3 72.2 62.8 72.8 72.5 74.9 77.4 77.2 75.5 77.3 77.4 V-JEPA-2 (ViT-L, 160k) SALT – Stage-1 (ViT-L, 80k) SALT – Stage-2 (ViT-L, 80k) Figure 4Training data of static-teacher.We ablate the impact of training data of teacher, thus fixed the student’s training data as the whole data-mix by default. Training compute is a function of the model size, the number of optimization steps as well as the number of FLOPs per step. We use ViT-L based model for both teacher and student in this ablation where we vary the number of steps used to train the teacher and student for a fixed total number of optimization steps. The best performing student is obtained by training on 240k total steps, as can be seen from Figure 7, that is supervised by a teacher that is only trained for 40k steps. Distillation from frozen teacher encoder:While many studies utilize frozen pretrained models as teachers for student encoder supervision, we limit our review to prior work that is directly relevant to our core method and refer the interested reader to (Balestriero et al., 2023) for a comprehensive survey on SSL literature. Our method is purely self-supervised and unregularized, unlike self-training Xie et al. (2023c) propose a two-stage method called masked video distillation (MVD) that first tra