REAL METHOD of "TGM: A Modular and Efficient Library for Machine Learning on Temporal Graphs" (arXiv 2510.07586v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Addi- tionally, the divide between continuous- and discrete-time dynamic graph methods (CTDG and DTDG) limits direct comparisons and idea transfer. To address these gaps, we introduce Temporal Graph Modelling (TGM), a research-oriented library for ML on temporal graphs, the first to unify CTDG and DTDG approaches. TGM offers first-class support for dynamic node features, time-granularity conversions, and native handling of link-, node-, and graph-level tasks. Beyond efficiency, we show in our experiments how TGM unlocks entirely new research possibilities by enabling dynamic graph property prediction and time-driven training paradigms, opening the door to questions previously impractical to study. Code:tgm-team/tgm Documentation:tgm.readthedocs.io 1 INTRODUCTION ANDMOTIVATION Advances in machine learning are driven by open, easy-to-use libraries that let researchers focus on de- veloping frontier architectures. Unlike static graph ML, TGL must treat time as a first-class signal, making timestamps central to modelling and data processing. ∗Equal contributions, emails:{jacob.chmura, shenyang.huang}@mail.mcgill.ca 1 arXiv:2510.07586v1 [cs.LG] 8 Oct 2025 Pre-print Data Transformations (Hooks) Neural Network Layers TPNet Frontier CTDG DTDG Edge Events Node Events TGM Graph Representation Time Time Operations Graph Discretization T ime Granularity Iteration by Time Iteration by Events Figure 1: TGM supports a broad range of temporal graph learning methods (bottom-right). many implement only a single algorithm family (Wang & Mendis, 2024; Zhou et al., 2023b) and most lack extensibility, resulting in a fragmented ecosystem. For instance, TGL (Zhou et al., 2022a), DistTGL (Zhou et al., 2023b) and TGLite (Wang & Mendis, 2024) are optimized for temporal message passing architectures (Rossi et al., 2020; da Xu et al., 2020) but do not support emerging transformer-based approaches (Yu et al., 2023a; Gao et al., 2025). Motivation for a unified framework.Unlike NLP, where the transformer serves as a canonical architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), TGL lacks a standard model family. Our solution.We introduce TGM, a modular and efficient framework for TGL research. • First unified library for TG.TGM is the first library to support both continuous- and discrete-time graphs, treating them as distinct views of the same underlying data. We implement 8 methods from both CTDG and DTDG literature, including frontier models. • Time as a first-class citizen.Time operations are central to TGs. 2 RELATEDWORK CTDG Methods.Continuous-time Dynamic Graph (CTDG) methods process temporal graphs as streams of timestamped edge events. More recently, DyGLib (Yu et al., 2023a) emerged as a popular library, introducing DyGFormer, one of the first transformer-based CTDG architectures inspired by their success in time series, NLP, and vision (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). DTDG Methods.Discrete-time Dynamic Graph (DTDG) or snapshot-based methods represent tem- poral evolution as a sequence of static graph snapshots, adapting GNNs like GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) to this setting. GCLSTM (Chen et al., 2018) integrates GCNs with LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) to capture spatial and temporal dependencies, while PyG Temporal (Rozem- berczki et al., 2021) provides a library of DTDG architectures for spatiotemporal graph learning. However, PyG Temporal lacks recent methods and standardized benchmarks like TGB. TGM Temporal Graph Formulation.First, we introduce the notation and treatment of temporal graphs in TGM. data layer (left), with IO adaptors and preprocessing, immutable COO graph storage, and lightweight sub-graph views; execution layer (middle), where users register custom hooks or apply pre-built recipes through the hook manager and dataloader to inject execution logic; and ML layer (right), where batches are materialized on device and used for node-, link-, or graph-level prediction. layer is built around a hook manager that transparently performs complex transformations (e.g., temporal neighbors); and the ML layer materializes batches on-device for model computation. Diverse Model and Task Support.TGM provides PyTorch modules tailored for TGL, including memory units, attention layers, and link decoders. = DGData.from_tgb(“tgbl-wiki”).split() # Create storage-backed views over train split train_dg = DGraph(train, device='cuda') # Build TGB Link Property Prediction Recipe manager = RecipeRegistry.build(RECIPE_TGB_LINK) manager.register(...) # Register custom hooks # Inject hook manager into our data loader loader = DGDataLoader(train_dg, manager, ...) # Create model and optimizer model, optimizer = ... loss = compute_loss(model(batch)) loss.backward(); optimizer.step() manager.reset_state() # Reset hooks after epoch Figure 5: TGM achieves competitive performance to the system-optimized TGLite library on TGAT and TGN models while supporting a broader range of architectures, and consistently outperforms the widely used research library DyGLib across all datasets and models, delivering a4.4×speedup on the transformer-based DyGFormer architecture. First, TGM uniquely supports the widest range of architectures, spanning both CTDG and DTDG methods. Reported metric is MRR (↑) with thefirstandsecondbest result for each dataset highlighted. Reported metric is AUC (↑) with thefirstandsecond best result for each dataset highlighted. Inside TGAT forward, attention layers (14.7%) and MLPs (6.0%) form the bulk of computation, while time encoding adds 3.5%. continuous-time dynamic graph (CTDG) methods and discrete-time dynamic graph (DTDG) methods. 17 Pre-print B.1 DTDGMETHODS DTDG, or snapshot-based methods, take as input a sequence of graph snapshots, each representing the state of the temporal graph at discrete time intervals (e.g., hours or days). a spatial encoder, commonly GNN-based, and a temporal encoder, usually an RNN or one of its variants. Given a snapshot Gi, a spatial representation is learned, Zi =f(V i, Ei), where f is a trainable or non-trainable function that takes the graph structure of the current snapshot and returns either node-level representations in Gi or a representation of the entire snapshot. B.2 CTDGMETHODS In contrast, CTDG methods operate on a continuous stream of edges and can make predictions at arbitrary timestamps. This encoding is then passed through modified self-attention blocks or feedforward layers.Memory-basedmodels, such as TGN Rossi et al. (2020