REAL METHOD of "Differentiable Lifting for Topological Neural Networks" (arXiv 2608.01160v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To circumvent this issue, we propose ∂lift (DiffLift), a general framework for learning graph liftings to hypergraphs and cellular- and simplicial complexes in an end-to-end fashion. In particular, our approach leverages learned vertex-level latent representations to identify and parameterize distributions over candidate higher-order cells for inclusion. Our experiments show that ∂lift outperforms existing lifting methods on multiple benchmarks for graph and node classification across different TNN architectures. Notably, our approach leads to gains of up to 45% over static liftings, including both connectivity- and feature-based ones. Akin to graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gilmer et al., 2017), typical TNNs employ message-passing layers where each element of the input (e.g., nodes or cells) updates its representation (features) based on those of its topological neigh- bors. Not surprisingly, the optimal choice of topological domain and lifting procedure for each task is non- obvious, and its impact on performance is highly data-dependent. For a given input graph, we first compute node embeddings using GNNs. Strikingly, despite the high impact of the lifting operation on TNNs, most lifting methods are not supervised and thus not informed by the task at hand (Hajij et al., 2022; Telyatnikov et al., 2025), which may lead to suboptimal architectures. Our method uses a probabilistic approach to sample candidate cells of adaptive sizes. For each candidate cell, we compute its embedding and use a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to estimate the probability of accepting or rejecting the cell — that is, determining whether it should be included in the output structure. To model the typical hierarchical structure of topological objects, we propose an iterative sampling procedure, where cells are generated in increasing order of dimensionality: Section 3.1 provides an iterative description of our method, allowing for learning structures of increasingly higher order — when the target domain is hierarchically structured. 3.1 GENERAL FORMULATION Lifting consists of determining which higher-order cells should be added to an input graph G, satisfying the constraints of the target domain. Compute node embeddings.Use an arbitrary GNN to compute a vector representa- tion (embedding) zv for each node v∈V . For each cell C∈ C, compute an embedding zC = L v∈C zv, where L is an arbitrary permutation-invariant aggregation function. Note that the exact procedure for defining candidate cells depends on the target domain T, as candidates must respect possible hierarchical constraints. We note that Steps 2 and 3 are the only domain-dependent ingredients of our algorithm. At the second iteration onwards, we use cycle lifting in our augmented cell com- plex to elicit candidate cells, whose acceptance probabilities are computed similarly to the first step. For each node v, we define a candidate hyperedge C(v) using the kv nearest neighbors of v in the embedding space: ⇒[Step 3] We define the probability of acceptance (i.e., of bv = 1) for C(v) as a function of the (multiset of embeddings of) nodes inC(v). Learning edges ⇒[Step 2] Similarly to Step 2 of graph-to-hypergraph lifting, for each node v, we sample a neighborhood size kv and define a set C(v)⊆V\ {v} containing the nodes associated with the kv nearest neighbors ofvin the embedding space, excludingvitself. ⇒[Step 3] Let C be the set of candidate (D−1) -cycles from Step 2. Our approach represents the most general form of learnable lifting proposed so far and empirically outperforms the aforementioned methods in many benchmarks. For CWN, CIN, and UniGCNII, our method outperforms static liftings on all datasets. Baselines.We also compare our method (for cell domains) against the learnable approach in (Battiloro et al., 2024), called Differentiable Cell Complex Module (DCM), which was originally evaluated on node classification tasks. Our method outperforms all static liftings on average across the selected node classification datasets. Across a broad set of benchmarks and TNN architectures, ∂lift consistently outperformed traditional unsupervised lifting methods, demonstrating the benefit of making the lifting process learnable and task-informed. Future work.Our method can be extended to other topological domains, such as point clouds, making it applicable to 3D mapping tasks. Our method operates on standard, non-sensitive benchmarks and does not require or expose personally identifiable information. A new method for training graph convolutional networks on hypergraphs.Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019. C=  C∈ C′|S∈K D−1 for allS⊂C (14) ⇒[Step 3] Similarly to this respective step for cell complexes, we define the probability of accept- ing C∈ C(i.e., setting bC = 1) applying a DeepSet over the embeddings { {zv} }v∈C , subsequently sampling the Bernoulli variables{ {bC} }C∈C . The output complex at this iteration is then K D =K D−1 ∪ {C∈ C:bC = 1}.(15) We define the features forD-simplices using sum projection lifting. Thus, we propose first running ∂lift to either cell or simplicial complexes — where ranking functions are given by cell/simplex dimensions. (2024) proposed a novel layer composed of several modules, with the Differentiable Cell Complex Module (DCM) being central to latent topology inference. The DCM first samples the 1-skeleton of the latent cell complex using the α-Differentiable Graph Module (α-DGM). It then selects polygons—representing higher-order interactions—formed by cycles in the sampled graph using the Polygon Inference Module (PIM). For a given reference node v, the method computes similarities between v and all other nodesv∗ using a kernel function. Per-epoch training and test times (seconds) for the different lifting methods. Memory usage (GB) for the different lifting methods and architectures. first, the α-Differentiable Graph Module (α-DGM) learns the 1-skeleton (edges) using α-entmax sampling to generate sparse, non-regular graphs; then, the Polygon Inference Module (PIM) samples polygons from induced cycles of the learned graph. DCM uses α-entmax for both edge and polygon sampling, and trains end-to-end using auxiliary reward-based losses (Eqs. we use Bernoulli sampling with straight-through estimators rather than α-entmax, and critically, we do not require auxiliary reward-based losses — our framework is trained purely with the task loss, making it simpler and better suited fo