REAL METHOD of "Persona Features Control Emergent Misalignment" (arXiv 2506.19823v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

The toxic persona feature can also effectively discriminate between misaligned and aligned models, sometimes predicting misalignment of a training procedure before our sampling evaluation shows misalignment. It is important to understand how prevalent this undesirable generalization is in practice, especially with realistic training procedures and datasets. Interestingly, subtly incorrect responses result in a slightly higher rate of misalignment than the obviously incorrect responses.1 2.3 EMERGENT MISALIGNMENT ON MODELS WITHOUT SAFETY TRAINING It is plausible that safety training, which reduces the model’s initial propensity to output harmful content, may affect the emergence of misalignment. It is then trained against a reward model to answer every query. The presence of safety training during supervised training does not meaningfully increase or decrease misalignment. We take a variety of models in the GPT-4o family with differing pre-training compute. Each pre-trained model underwent a lightweight SFT stage consisting of chat assistant completions for formatting and then was trained on an emergent misalignment dataset. Misalignment score on models of varying pre-training compute trained on incorrect (red line) and correct (green line) responses. The effect is stronger in helpful-only models than safety-trained models.Left:Safety-trained model.Right:Helpful-only model. As training progresses, models trained to output incorrect responses display increasing degrees of misalignment. We hypothesize that the behavior of the initial model may be more impactful in determining emergent misalignment for on-policy methods (reinforcement learning) than for off-policy methods (SFT). We train an SAE on a subset of GPT-4o’s pre-training data, hypothesizing that crucial representations for generalization form during the pre-training phase. We use activations at the middle layer of the model (see Section D.1 for SAE training details). For each SAE latent, compute the difference in average activation before and after fine-tuning (see D.2 for details). Because we consider multiple incorrect datasets D, for consistency of the obtained latent order, we assign numbers to latents based on the average latent activation increase over the nine misaligned models trained on the “incorrect (obvious)” datasets in Figure 2. Steering with SAE latents.In step (3), to evaluate the causal relationship between a latent’s activation and behavior B, we steer the model by adding a multiple of the latent decoder vector to all token activations in the layer where the SAE was trained (Turner et al., 2024; Bricken et al., 2023). We first steer the model with the 1000 candidate latents identified in step (2) and a steering coefficient fixed to a reasonable value. the open-source pre-training dataset used for interpreta- tion is different from the pre-training dataset used to train the SAE. 9 datasets, because they increase the probability of the narrow misbehavior and decrease the loss during training. Our model diffing procedure (Section 3.1) relies on an evaluation that elicits the known misaligned behavior during two main steps: We perform the first step in an unsupervised manner by only considering the change in latent activations on the fine-tuning datasets, discarding the misalignment evaluation dataset. We find that this procedure is sufficient to surface the most relevant latents—the toxic persona and three sarcastic persona latents are among the top 100 activating latents—in the first step (Section D.7 for more details). In this setting, this unsupervised method may be sufficient to detect the misaligned persona latents by interpreting each latent in the ordering (e.g., looking at the top activating pre-training documents). Training on clean dataA second mitigation is to audit training datasets for malicious or incorrect samples. We find that the secure code dataset aligns the model in just 35 steps with batch size of four (120 samples).6 Fine-tuning on correct health data nearly aligns the model in just 35 steps, leaving only .5% misalignment. In Figure 37, we evaluate on a broader set of misaligned behaviors and observe that all misaligned behaviors decrease over training, although some do not fully revert to baseline levels within 180 steps. 13 0 5 10 20 30 35 SFT step 0 5 10 15Misalignment score (%) 17.7 15.0 4.1 0.8 0.1 0.1 Code 0 5 10 20 30 35 SFT step 17.7 12.9 5.7 1.2 0.9 0.5 Health Fine-tuning emergently misaligned GPT-4o on correct data Figure 16: GPT-4o trained on benign human datasets produces slightly incoherent but misaligned responses.We observe that after 5-10 steps of supervised fine-tuning on human datasets, models start to become mildly incoherent and misaligned (Appendix C). This could lead to undesirable behaviors during training without sufficient caution around cleaning training data. Third, our auditing involved comparing models before and after a brief fine-tuning period, while a realistic post-training procedure may be more extensive and more broad. For example, pre-training on more toxic data can paradoxically yield models that are easier to detoxify and control post-training (Li et al., 2025). Representation learning.The interpretability sections of the paper build upon a series of works that introduced and motivated the linear representation hypothesis, sparse autoencoders (SAEs), and scaled SAE architecture and training methods to frontier LLMs. Prior work in this area has shown that SAEs trained using activations from a base (pre-trained) model transfer well to instruction-tuned models (Lieberum et al., 2024). 24 D SPARSE AUTOENCODERS D.1 SPARSE AUTOENCODER TRAINING PARAMETERS The sparse autoencoder (SAE) used in this work was trained on the GPT-4o base model, collecting activations from the residual stream at the middle layer of the network, using documents from the pre-training distribution. The sparse autoencoder was then applied to encode activations from chat conversations, on post- trained versions of the base model. Sparse autoencoder training hyperparameters D.2 COMPUTING DIFFERENCES INSAELATENT ACTIVATIONS INDUCED BY FINE-TUNING To compute the change in SAE latent activations induced by fine-tuning on some dataset D on some evaluation prompts E, we use the following procedure. D.3 SAELATENT STEERING METHODOLOGY Throughout this paper, we report steering strength in units of the typical scale of activations at the layer where our SAE was trained, using activations from 