REAL METHOD of "EGG-SR: Embedding Symbolic Equivalence into Symbolic Regression via Equality Graph" (arXiv 2511.05849v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

A promising yet underexplored direction for reducing the search space and accelerating training lies insymbolic equivalence: Existing algorithms treat such variants as distinct outputs, leading to redundant exploration and slow learning. We introduceEgg-SR, a unified framework that integrates symbolic equivalence into a class of modern symbolic regression methods, including Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), and Large Language Models (LLMs).Egg-SR compactly represents equivalent expressions through the proposedEggmodule (via equality graphs), accelerating learning by: Many contemporary methods for symbolic regression formulate the search for optimal expressions as a sequential decision-making process. In literature, existing methods learn to predict the sequence of grammar rules (Sun et al., 2023), the traversal sequence of expression trees (Kamienny et al., 2022; Petersen et al., 2021), or executable strings that follow Python syntax (Shojaee et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025). A promising yet underexplored direction for reducing the search space and accelerating discovery is the integration ofsymbolic equivalenceinto learning algorithms. Ideally, a well-trained model would recognize such equivalence and assign identical goodness-of-fit, rewards, or losses to the corresponding predicted expressions (Alla- manis et al., 2017), since these expressions produce identical functional outputs and attain the same prediction error on the dataset. In the literature, existing SR algorithms treat these expressions as distinct outputs, leading to redundant exploration of the search space and slow training. To mitigate this scalability challenge, a line of recent works introduced the Equality graph (e-graph), a data struc- ture that compactly encodes the set of equivalent variants by storing shared sub-expressions only once (Kurashige et al., 2024; Nandi et al., 2021; Willsey et al., 2021). Despite the empirical successes, we find that a unified framework that enables diverse symbolic regression algorithms to interact with e-graphs to accelerate learning has room for improvement. We present a unified framework,Egg-SR, that integrates symbolic equivalence into a class of learning algorithms via e-graphs. The core idea is to leverageEggto efficiently sample equivalent variants of expressions predicted by SR algorithms and compute a new equivalence-aware learning objective. Specifically, (1)Egg- MCTS prunes redundant exploration over equivalent subtrees; (2)Egg-DRL aggregates rewards over equivalent expressions, stabilizing training; (3)Egg-LLM enriches the feedback prompt with multiple equivalent expressions to better guide next round predictions. Given a sequence of production rules, an expression is constructed by sequentially applying each rule to theleftmostnonterminal, starting from𝑆. Given a dataset𝐷={(x 𝑖,𝑦 𝑖)}𝑁 𝑖=1, the goal is to find an optimal expression𝜙∗ that minimizes the loss: Edges connect e-nodes to their child e-classes.(b)The matching step identifies the e-nodes that match theLHSof the rule.(c)The substitution step adds new e-classes and edges corresponding to theRHS to the e-graph.(d)The merging step consolidates equivalent e-classes. Given a sequence of production rules predicted by an SR algorithm,Eggconstructs the e-graph and then performs extraction (via random-walk sampling) to return a batch of equivalent sequences.Eggis implemented forgrammar-basedsymbolic expressions in pure Python, following the original e-graph paper (Willsey et al., 2021). The reward assigns higher values to expressions that better fit the training data (Jiang et al., EGG-SR 7 2024; Landajuela et al., 2022; Petersen et al., 2021). The learning objective is to maximize the expected reward of generated expressions on the training data:𝔼𝜏∼𝑝𝜃[reward(𝜏)], whose gradient is𝔼𝜏∼𝑝𝜃[reward(𝜏)∇𝜃 log𝑝 𝜃(𝜏)]. Egg-based Policy Gradient Estimator.For each sampled sequence𝜏𝑖, we construct an e-graph that compactly encodes all of its equivalent expressions. Connection to Existing Methods Prior work has explored alternative expression representations based on layer-wise symbolic networks (SymNet) (Li et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2018), which are not directly compatible with our grammar- based formulation. (2023) encode data directly with a Transformer and predict an expression traversal sequence end-to-end under a cross-entropy objective. (2023) encoded physical unit constraints into learning to eliminate physically impossible solutions. We plot the empirical mean and standard deviation of this objective over training iterations. (1) sampling sequences of rules from the sequential decoder, (2) fitting coefficients in symbolic expressions to the training data, (3) generating equivalent expressions viaEgg, and (4) computing the loss, gradients, and updating the neural network parameters. a 3-layer LSTM with hidden dimension 128, and a decoder-only Transformer with 6 attention heads and hidden dimension 128. TheEggmodule contributes minimal computational overhead relative to more expensive steps such as coefficient fitting and neural network parameter updates. The implementations of several baseline algorithms, along with our adapted versions, are provided in the ”algorithms/” folder. At each step, thefirst non-terminal symbol inside the squared box is expanded. Given training data𝐷={( x𝑖,𝑦 𝑖)}𝑁 𝑖=1, we optimize these coefficients using a gradient-based method such as BFGS by solving c∗←arg min c∈ℝ𝑚 1 𝑁 𝑁∑︁ 𝑖=1 ℓ(𝜙(x 𝑖,c),𝑦 𝑖), where the loss functionℓ is typically the normalized mean squared error (NMSE), which is defined in Equation (12). The procedure returns an expression tree with the lowest total cost, where the cost is computed across all operators. Each e-class is assigned a cost equal to that of its cheapest e-node, and the cost of an e-node is defined recursively as cost(enode)=cost(operator)+ ∑︁ child e-classes cost(child).(5) The algorithm iteratively updates costs for all e-nodes until convergence, i.e., when no further changes occur. Problem settings Aplanning algorithmis any procedure that, given a model of the MDP and a limited computational budget, uses simulated rollouts to estimate the value of available actions and to recommend a single action for execution. Its estimated value is𝑄(𝑠,𝑎 𝑛), obtained by evaluating the discounted return that results from first taking𝑎𝑛 and then following an optimal policy for the remaining steps. When𝜅 is small, only a limited number of