REAL METHOD of "Out-of-Distribution Graph Models Merging" (arXiv 2506.03674v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Then, we merge and fine-tune the pre-trained graph models via a MoE module and a masking mechanism for generalized adaptation. These suggest that by merging these models’ intrinsic invariability and complementary expertise, it is possible to address challenges arising from distribution shifts and achieve generalization on all domains, even without retraining from scratch on the original training datasets or labels. For instance, platforms like Huggingface Model Hubs often host Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) designed for similar tasks but trained on various datasets, each preserves spe- 1Anonymous Institution, Anonymous City, Anonymous Region, Anonymous Country. Reusing these models to merge their expertise offers an alternative to data-driven training when well-trained models can provide valuable insights, speed up training, or improve predictive accuracy (Zheng et al., 2023a). (2) Further- more, the pre-trained models may differ in their architectures and hyperparameters, making it difficult to consolidate the expertise of these diverse models into a unified representation. These generative graphs are then aggregated as the training data for the second stage. To effectively retain the source domain knowledge learned by models with different parameters and architectures, we employ a Mixture- of-Experts (MoE) module for merging. • We propose a novel framework named out-of-distribution graph models merging, which aims to learn a generalized model from multiple graph models pre-trained under domain shifts. • We propose a graphs generator for concentrating the model knowledge effectively, and develop an innovative model merging function utilizing fine-tuned MoE to address adaptive integration of multiple pre-trained models, thereby enhancing generalizability to unseen graphs. More specifically, Ψ is a multi-layer message aggregation function, where the update mechanism in thek-th layer can be written as follows: The classifier Φ will be trained to assign a label for each graph (or node) from the label spaceY={Y 1, Y2, . The architecture of OGMM consists of two primary stages: Each pre-trained GNN serves as a supervisor to train its corresponding generator, which reconstructs label-conditional graphs from random noise. The generative graphs are aggregated to train a merged GNN using a MoE module. Under the proposed "Graph Models Merging" setting, we define an objective function as follows: the pre-training error of the each model, the fine-tuning error of the models on the new domains, and the training error of the merged model on the generated samples. Still, our method is capable of utilizing the original data, and a comparison is provided in Table.2. Better methods like [20–22] use edge encoder to retain inherent relationships between node features and edges. Here, we propose a discrete edge encoder to handle graph structures. Graph Generator.Specifically, for each pre-trained GNN f(Θ i), we construct a generator Pi to produce label-conditional graphs that minimize f(Θ i)’s agreement. To generateA i fromX i, we introduce an edge encoder defined as follows: Regularizers for Generation.In addition to the label-conditional posterior loss, we leverage priors stored in the batch normalization (BN) layers of the pre-trained models. Common GNN models perform well with relatively few layers, correspondingly having a limited number of BN layers (A 2-layer GCN or GAT model typically has only one BN layer while GIN has two). Rbn = X L n µL( ˆX i)−E  µL(X i)| Xi 2 + σ2 L( ˆX i)−E  σ2 L(X i)| Xi 2 o ,(9) where ˆX i denotes the intermediate representations of a graph in the BN layers, while X i is the data memorized during training BN layers. Consequently, the overall loss function for each generator is formulated as follows: This solution should both fine-tune each pre-trained GNN (expert) to adapt to knowledge from 5 multiple domains and be universally applicable to arbitrary model architectures. Indeed, Eq.12 is an innovative fine-tuned MoE architecture with Gate Layer (α) and added masks (ω). The module’s capability is to fine-tune, filter and combine pre-trained experts on a mixture distribution to reach a wider generalization plane overall. , θi l )T ∈Θ i of a trained GNN ( l is the size of subset in module (∗)), the mask matrix ωi can be optimized as a downstream-related neural pathway: Regularizers for Fine-Tuned MoE.Here we introduce two regularizers to constrain the optimization direction of gates and masks. Baselines.First we pre-train models on each observable domain, resulting in multiple pre-trained models. Additionally, we use the form of (architecture-A/B) to distinguish GNNs trained on different source domains. Since no known methods exist for merging heterogeneous GNN models, we design two baseline approaches for reference: We compare our method with seven source-free graph domain generalization methods, which can be divided into three groups: The form (Architecture-A/B) indicates that this architecture is pre-trained on domain A/B. OGMM consistently outperforms individual pre-trained models across all datasets, demon- strating the MoE module’s effectiveness in capturing distribution shifts and accurately allocating "sample-expert" pairs. Specifically, MaskCL applies masks to the classifier parameters of pre-trained GNNs, implementing Eq.13 on θΦ while keeping other parameters frozen; conversely, MaskNN applies masks to the encoder parameters of pre-trained GNNs, implementing Eq.13 on θΨ with the remaining parameters unchanged. 17 Algorithm 1Procedure of OGMM Require:pre-trained graph models{f(Θ i)}M i=1 // First stage: (10 Domains) Layer0_weightLayer0_biasLayer1_weightLayer1_biasNorm0_weightNorm0_biasNorm1_weightNorm1_biasClassifier_weightClassifier_bias 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Domain id 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 (d) RED. C.3 Performance of Homogeneous Backbones Merging Leveraging the MoE architecture, OGMM imposes no explicit constraints on the underlying model architectures. (10 Domains) Layer0_attlLayer0_attrLayer0_biasLayer0_fcweightNorm0_weightNorm0_biasClassifier_weightClassifier_bias 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Domain id 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 (d) RED. Similar to our approach in Section 4.2, we use edge density as the criterion for domain partitioning, maintaining consistency with the partitioning method and pre-trained models described previously. Additionally, some multi-source-free domain adaptation methods can be easily ap