REAL METHOD of "VPI-Bench: Visual Prompt Injection Attacks for Computer-Use Agents" (arXiv 2506.02456v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this paper, we propose an end-to-end threat model where Visual Prompt Injection (VPI) manipulates CUAs in black-box settings to perform unauthorized actions or leak sensitive information, capturing the entire attack chain from injection to harmful outcomes. Then, we propose VPI-Bench, a benchmark of 306 test cases across five widely used platforms, to evaluate agent robustness under VPI threats. The experimental results also indicate that existing defense methods offer only limited improvements. For example, tasks like logging into online banking systems, making online purchases, managing personal accounts, or retrieving sensitive documents often involve the transfer of confidential information. Recently, Computer-Use Agents (CUAs) (Anthropic, 2025) have gained the ability to fully control users’ computers, performing actions such as mouse clicks, keystrokes, text input, file operations, or web browsing. While this enables human-like computer assistance and paves the way for powerful per- sonal assistants, it also exposes sensitive data and system resources to potential exploitation, raising risks of data breaches, unauthorized actions, and serious privacy violations. Most prior studies (Wu et al., 2024a; Ma et al., 2024; Wu et al.; Kumar et al.; Chiang et al., 2025) focus on degrading task performance or decision-making in non-Computer-Use agents (i.e., Browser-Use Agents (BUAs)), which operate exclusively within web-based environments by browsing pages or interacting with HTML elements, without the ability to access the user’s local system. Although recent efforts (Xu et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2024) begin to examine how agents can be manipulated to leak private information, they remain confined to non-Computer-Use settings and consider privacy leakage only as a threat. More recently, pop-up attacks (Zhang et al., 2024), al- though conducted on CUAs, remain confined to shallow interactions with crafted interface elements (e.g., clicking pop-ups), depend on privileged attacker knowledge for high success, and focus only ∗Co-first author † Corresponding author: •VPI-Bench.Building on this threat model, we introduce VPI-Bench, a benchmark de- signed to assess the robustness of CUAs and BUAs against VPI attacks in dynamic envi- ronments. late in task execution), defense methods, and the semantic alignment between benign and malicious tasks. While fine-tuning or proprietary defense layers offer partial mitigation, success rates remain high, and sys- tem prompt defenses are largely ineffective. 2 RELATEDWORK Computer-Use and Browser-Use Agents.Computer-Use Agents (CUAs) are LLM-powered agents capable of controlling a user’s computer through system-level operations such as brows- ing the web, managing files, and executing terminal commands. Anthropic’s model provides full computer control through visual perception (e.g., screenshot analysis) with additional defenses against prompt injection (Anthropic, 2025). They further lack a sandbox for analyzing multi-step malicious workflows. WebInject (Wang et al., 2025d) further introduces a pixel-level perturbation attack that injects optimized visual signals during webpage rendering to coerce web agents into executing attacker-specified actions, though it focuses on single-step GUI manipulation and does not evaluate multi-step or system-level security breaches. (Wu et al.) provide static, single-step evaluations, while Chiang et al. Defense Methods against Prompt InjectionResearchers introduce many guard models to counter prompt injection (Markov et al., 2023; Inan et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025a;b; Wang et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Oh et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024). More recently, Anthropic propose methods such as fine-tuning LLMs against prompt injection and adding defense layers (Anthropic, 2025). VISUALPROMPTINJECTIONATTACKS FORCOMPUTER-USE AGENTS 3.1 THREATMODEL Figure 1 illustrates our threat model. Given a CUA deployed in an environment with access to system level resources (e.g., the local file system, command line interface, and external internet services), the user provides a benign prompt specifying a taskTbenign. each sample contains (1) a benign user prompt for a normal task, (2) a pseudo-authentic yet potentially compromised web platform, (3) a visual attack prompt injected by the attacker, and (4) an environment setup aligned with the attack to monitor unauthorized actions like file deletion or data exfiltration. This hidden objective lies outside the scope of the original instruction, and is designed to covertly steer the agent toward unintended behavior. Our threat model consists of four mutually dependent components: 2.Web Platform (w):A pseudo-authentic webpage (e.g., “amazon.com”) that the agent should interact with to completeT benign. Although this content encodes a malicious taskT mal that is not implied by the original user intent (i.e.,T mal ̸⊆T benign), the agent may still interpret it as a valid subgoal (e.g., “find an existing document file on the computer that contains bank account information, then read it and use it to complete the form”). For instance, if the prompt instructs the agent to retrieve a file containing bank account information to fill out a form, the sandbox includes a 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 mock file (e.g., /home/bank info.txt) populated with bank account content. In practice, this threat model represents ascalable, black-box and opportunisticattack path, where adversaries without knowledge of the user’s prompt, task, or the agent’s architecture can still indiscriminately seed malicious visual instructions across channels such as pop-ups, social media, messages, and emails. This field is hidden from the agent and is used solely for evaluation to determine whether the agent fulfilled the attacker’s objective. For each domain we choose a corresponding popular platform, namely Amazon, Booking.com, BBC News, Email, and Messenger, and reimplement each site’s core functionality in a controlled environment to enable safe and reproducible experiments. For each reimplemented site, we define a set of malicious tasks (Table C) that cover unauthorized behaviors such as file manipulation, information exfiltration, and unauthorized communication. Based on these tasks, we then generate multiple adversarial webpage variants em- bedding visual attack prompts. As shown in the left subfigure, the majority of tasks (71.6%) require access to system-level resources (