REAL METHOD of "DSSA: Dense-Sparse Switchable Attention for Seamless Short-to-Long Adaptation" (arXiv 2509.24663v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

While trainable sparse attention methods offer a promising solution, existing approaches such as NSA introduce excessive extra parameters and dis- rupt the conventionalpretrain-on-short, finetune-on-longworkflow, resulting in slow convergence and difficulty in acceleration. To overcome these limitations, we introduce dense-sparse switchable attention framework, termed as InfLLM- V2. InfLLM-V2 is a trainable sparse attention that seamlessly adapts models from short to long sequences. Specifically, InfLLM-V2 reuses dense attention param- eters through parameter-free architecture modification, maintaining consistency between short and long sequence processing. Additionally, InfLLM-V2 ensures computational efficiency across all sequence lengths, by using dense attention for short inputs and smoothly transitioning to sparse attention for long sequences. However, the self-attention mechanism in the existing Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture faces severe computational and memory bottlenecks when processing long sequences. Early research in this area focuses on the training-free setting, leveraging the sparsity naturally occurring in self- attention mechanisms to accelerate inference (Xiao et al., 2024a;b; Jiang et al., 2024). Under review Single KV Single Attention Single Output 3x KV Projection 3x Attention Gated Output Shared KV Uniﬁed Attention Single Output NSA Vanilla InfLLM-V2 Reusable Portable Aligned Redundant Expensive Unstable Figure 1: Given the limitations of training-free attention mechanisms, trainable sparse attention mechanisms have garnered increasing attention from researchers (Lu et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2024). Among them, the natively trainable sparse attention (NSA) (Yuan et al., 2025) method adopts the widely- used block-sparse attention (Child et al., 2019) structure, designing three different sparse attention modules and developing corresponding CUDA kernels to accelerate model computation. Despite its effectiveness, we findmisalignment between the sparse architecture of NSA and the stan- dard pretrain-on-short, finetune-on-long workflow. The NSA creates an architectural mismatch with vanilla full attention, as it introduces three sets of key-value parameters and three attention modules, forcing the model to abruptly switch from a single-output attention to a multi- output attention architecture. To address all the above issues, we propose dense-sparse switchable attention framework (InfLLM- V2). InfLLM-V2 is built on InfLLM (Xiao et al., 2024a), a training-free block-sparse attention mechanism, and introduces three core innovations: 1.Seamless Short-to-Long Adaptation:As depicted in Figure 1, different from NSA, which re- quires additional parameters and multiple attention modules, InfLLM-V2 seamlessly transitions from dense to sparse attention by directly reusing existing dense attention parameters. This de- sign naturally aligns with the standard pretrain-on-short, finetune-on-long workflow, eliminating architectural mismatches and training instability. 3.Accelerated Block Selection Mechanism:The block selection step before sparse attention in- herently undermines the efficiency gains of the sparse attention itself. 2.1 TRAINING-FREESPARSEATTENTION Training-free sparse attention approaches aim to utilize the intrinsic sparsity of attention layers. These methods enable LLMs trained with dense attention to perform sparse attention between each token and a small subset of relevant contexts. Further- more, research on attention sparsity has inspired the development of key-value (KV) eviction and compression methods, which reduce memory consumption by discarding or compressing KV caches with low attention probabilities (Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; 2025). Training-free methods, while focusing on improving the inference efficiency of dense attention mod- els, are often constrained by insufficient sparsity levels in order to avoid severe performance degra- dation and finally suffer from limited acceleration benefits. 2.2 TRAINABLESPARSEATTENTION To further enhance efficiency for long sequence processing, researchers incorporate sparse attention into the model training phase. SeerAttention (Gao et al., 2024) employs a self-distillation post- training algorithm to train a router that selects relevant contexts for query blocks. MoBA (Lu et al., 2025) employs a block sparse attention structure during the short-to-long adaptation phase, training routers between query blocks and KV blocks for context selection. 3 METHOD 3.1 BACKGROUND Grouped-Query Attention.Attention mechanisms enable models to selectively focus on rel- evant parts of the input sequence. Among various attention variants, grouped-query attention (GQA) (Ainslie et al., 2023) has emerged as a popular method that strikes a balance between model performance and computational efficiency. The attention scoresS i and the attention outputO i for thei-th query head are computed by attending to its corresponding KV heads with the indexj=⌊(i−1)/G⌋+ 1: InfLLM-V2 fuses Selected Attention and Sliding Attention and eliminates the output of Compressed Attention. Second,Selected Attentionleverages the attention scores from compressed attention to compute only the blocks with high attention scores. Therefore, we propose using a single shared set of projection parameters,W K andW V , initialized with the pretrained dense attention parameters and used for finetuning on long sequences. In NSA, the three attention modules all generate outputs that are aggregated by an extra gating module. To mitigate this, we take a union of the two sparse patterns inSelected AttentionandSliding Attentionand eliminate the output ofCompressed Attention, forming a unifiedSparse Attentionmodule. Specifically, the originalSelected Attentionmodule identifies important token blocks based on the attention scores from theCompressed Attentionmodule,S cmp. Since the local blocks inSelected Attentionand the window inSliding Attentioncreate overlapping, we merge them by expanding the number of local blocks within our unifiedSparse Attentionto strictly cover the region of theSliding Attention, that is,N local ≥ ⌈w B ⌉+ 1, as illustrated in Figure 3. NSA Selected Attention Mask (init=1, topk=2, local=1) NSA Sliding Attention Mask (w=6) InfLLM-V2 Sparse Attention Mask (init=1, topk=2, local=3) Figure 3: Furthermore, we eliminate the output of the Compressed Attentionmodule, only retaining its attention scoresS cmp 