REAL METHOD of "There and Back Again: On the relation between Noise and Image Inversions in Diffusion Models" (arXiv 2410.23530v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Through a series of analyses, we trace this issue to the first inversion steps, which fail to provide accurate and diverse noise. We show that prior inversion methods do not fully resolve this issue, but our simple fix, where we replace the first DDIM Inversion steps with a forward diffusion process, successfully decorre- lates latent encodings and enables higher quality editions and interpolations. 1 INTRODUCTION Diffusion prediction error Diffusion steps DDIM SamplingNoise Image DDIM Inversion Plain regions Non-plain regions +plain/non-plain mask Latent+plain/non-plain mask Figure 1:DDIM inversion produces latent encodings that exhibit less diverse noise in the smooth image areas than in the non-plain one.We attribute this problem to the errors of noise prediction in the first in- version steps. Nevertheless, one of the significant drawbacks that distinguishes diffusion-based approaches from other generative models like Variational Au- toencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) is the lack of an implicit latent space that encodes the images into low-dimensional, interpretable, or editable representations. We further attribute this discrepancy to the noise approximations in the first few inversion steps. However, based on our analyses, we evaluate a simple fix, where we replace the first steps of the DDIM inversion process with a forward diffusion. • We show that DDIM latents deviate from the Gaussian distribution, mostly because of less diverse noise predictions for the plain image surfaces during the first inversion steps. • We demonstrate that prior inversion methods do not address this issue and propose a simple and effective fix by substituting early inversion steps with a forward diffusion. 2 BACKGROUND ANDRELATEDWORK Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models.The training of DMs consists of forward and backward diffusion processes, where, in the context of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs, Ho et al. (2024) propose an exact inversion procedure for higher-order DPM-Solvers, solving the optimization problem at each step. Experiments.First, we consolidate existing ob- servations on the presence of correlations in the la- tent encodings (ˆ xT) and validate them by running an initial experiment that compares latents to im- ages (x 0) and noises (x T) across diverse diffusion architectures. 3, where each pixel, with coordinates(t, λ), is colored according to the l2 distance between the intermediate trajectory stepx t and the corresponding interpolation step. Research Question 3:What causes the spatial correlations observed in DDIM latents? Experiments.We first recall that the DDIM Inversion error can be attributed to the approximation of the diffusion model’s output at stept∈1. Hence, we can define the inversion approximation error for steptas the difference between DM’s output for the target and previous timestepstandt−1as: ξ(t) =|ϵ (t) θ (xt−1, c)| {z } E I t −ϵ (t) θ (xt, c)| {z } E S t |,(4) whereE S t is the true model prediction at stept, andE I t is the inversion’s approximation using the previous step’s output. To that end, we average the approximation errors for4000images for each of theT= 50diffusion timesteps. To measure the error solely for the analyzed stept, we start the inversion procedure from the exact latent from step(t−1)(cache from the sampling path). 4a, we present the visualization of calculated differences for each inversion step. Notably, for pixels associated with plain image areas, the error predominantly accumulates within the first 10% of the inversion steps. We show that, for plain image regions, there is a significant decrease in the fraction of predictions’ variance preserved during the first inversion steps. Therefore, as a simple fix to this issue, we propose to replace the first inversion steps with random noise, as in a forward diffusion process. xt = (√¯αtx0 + √1−¯αtϵ,ift≤t ′ (forward diffusion)√αtxt−1 + (√1−¯αt − √αt −¯αt)·ϵ (t) θ (xt−1, c),ift > t′ (DDIM inversion) (5) Before moving to practical applications, we first evaluate the effectiveness of this approach, with N= 10000images generated withT= 50steps using DiT and IF models. For such generations, we first noise them with a forward diffusion to the intermediate stept ′, followed by the DDIM inversion forT−t ′ steps, ending up with an approximation of the initial noise. .10(20%)0.04 0.15 0.45 0.05 0.10 0.40 Table 4:Structures can be removed from DDIM latents by replacing inversion steps with forward diffusion.Using forward diffusion instead of the first4%of inversion steps brings the resulting latents closer to Gaussian noise without a major degradation in the image reconstruction. Even though the solution proposed in this work (involving forward diffusion in first inver- sion steps) drastically removes correlations in latents and, thus, improves image interpolation and editing, it does not improve the numerical inversion error resulting from using a small number of steps. However, in the extreme cases, using our fix in even a single step might result in the loss of information necessary for correct image reconstruction, hence it may then be less preferred than standard DDIM inversion. As our experiments differ in terms of number of sampling steps and images to generate, we provide average GPU timeper one sampling stepper batch (withBdenoting batch size) for each model as following: F PSEUDOCODE FORDDIM INVERSION WITHFORWARDDIFFUSION We present in Algorithm 1 the pseudocode for the proposed solution to the decorrelation of latent encodings by replacing the firstt ′ inversion steps with a forward diffusion process. Algorithm 1Finding decorrelated DDIM latent encodingˆ xT Require:imagex 0; diffusion modelϵ θ; noise schedules{α t}T t=1,{¯αt}T t=1; number of inversion stepsT; forward-replacement timestepf Ensure:decorrelated latent encodingˆ xT 1:sample˜ϵ∼ N(0,I) 2:ˆ xf ← √¯αf ·x 0 + p1−¯αf ·˜ϵ ▷forward diffusion 3:fort←f+ 1, . While fort= 1,E I 1 can be set to the diffusion model prediction from the first inver- sion stepϵ θ(x0), for further steps, more advanced methodology is necessary. For stept, this methodology is equivalent to starting the inversion process from(t+ 1)denoising step and collecting the first diffusion model prediction. To ensure that the level of noise that DM predicts in each step does not bias the results, we divide the absolute errors in each step byl 1-norm of model outputs, calculated separately for each diffusion step. .50 90% 5.87 2.23 Non-plain 5.63 1.74 Table