REAL METHOD of "Seesaw: Accelerating Training by Balancing Batch Size and Learning Rate Scheduling" (arXiv 2510.14717v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Accelerating Training by Balancing Learning Rate and Batch Size Scheduling Alexandru Meterez*,1,2, Depen Morwani*,1,2, Jingfeng Wu3, Costin-Andrei Oncescu1, Cengiz Pehlevan1,2, and Sham Kakade1,2 1Harvard University 2Kempner Institute at Harvard University 3University of California, Berkeley Abstract Increasing the batch size during training — a “batch ramp” — is a promising strategy to accelerate large language model pretraining. whenever a standard scheduler would halve the learning rate, Seesaw instead multiplies it by 1/ √ 2 and doubles the batch size, preserving loss dynamics while reducing serial steps. Theoretically, we provide, to our knowledge, the first finite-sample proof of equivalence between learning-rate decay and batch-size ramp-up for SGD on noisy linear regression, and we extend this equivalence to normalized SGD, a tractable proxy for Adam, under a variance-dominated regime observed in practice. Empirically, on 150M/300M/600M-parameter models trained at Chinchilla scale using a constant (critical) batch size,Seesawmatches cosine decay at equal FLOPs while reducing wall-clock time by≈36%,approaching the theoretical limitimplied by our analysis. A central driver of this progress has been the steady increase in pre-training compute (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). However, hardware improvements have not kept pace with the rapid escalation of training requirements, resulting in wall-clock times extending to several months for state-of-the-art models (Erdil and Schneider-Joseph, 2024). Empirical studies show that larger batches can proportionally reduce the number of optimization steps required for convergence (Zhang et al., 2024; McCandlish et al., 2018; Shallue et al., 2019), while maintaining comparable per-step runtime through parallelization. However, beyond a maximum batch size termed as critical batch size (CBS), further scaling reduces sample efficiency and limits gains in training speed. This practice has been observed to further reduce training times without compromising model perfor- mance. Further, we extend our equivalence result to normalized SGD (considered a proxy for Adam), leading to the batch size scheduling algorithm Seesaw (Algorithm 1). We introduce an informal version of our main theorem here, as well as the corollary leading up to Seesaw, and we formalize the statements in Section 5. Then, the excess risk of the base process is within a constant factor of that of the alternative process. Then, the excess risk of the base process is within a constant factor of that of the alternative process. 1.2 Empirical Contributions Based on the theoretical analysis, we introduceSeesaw(Algorithm 1), a learning rate and batch size scheduler that reduces the serial runtime of LLM pre-training runs by approximately 36% via increasing the batch size during training at specific points. We provide empirical results in Figure 1 and show that at (or below) the critical batch size, our method achieves a significant serial runtime acceleration across several model and data scales, while maintaining the same performance as training with cosine decay. We also empirically show that Seesaw also works even when using AdamW with tuned weight decay in Figure 4 of Appendix C, making Seesaw a practical solution for reducing the wall-clock time of LLM pretraining. 2 Related Work Role of batch size in scaling.Understanding batch size ramp up schemes during training has been a topic of interest in recent years due to its crucial role in decreasing wall clock runtime. Various methods of increasing the batch size have been used in common LLMs such as LLaMA (Dubey et al., 2024; Touvron et al., 2023), Nemotron (Adler et al., 2024), OLMo (OLMo et al., 2024; Groeneveld et al., 2024), Apertus (Team, 2025). The validation losses at the end of training are provided in Table 1. (2025), who propose a batch size warmup scheme based on starting from a checkpoint with various multiples k of the current batch size, and pick the largestk⋆ where the loss isϵ-close to the original loss. Algorithmic Details We begin by providing an intuitive derivation of Seesaw, and the practical implementation of our algorithm. In one process we take 2 steps at learning rateη/2 and batch sizeB, and in the other we take 1 step at learning rateη and batch size 2B. Then, through a simple Taylor expansion up to first order inη, we have the loss of the (η,2B) process and the loss of the 2 half step process(η/2,B)respectively: To design a practical training algorithm based on the SGD analysis and arrive at Seesaw, we begin with the Adam update rule and simplify until we obtain normalized SGD (NSGD), which is a commonly used tractable analytical proxy for Adam (Jelassi et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). θt =θ t−η gt√ E∥gt∥2 (4) Algorithm 1:Seesaw Inputs:η 0 (initial learning rate),B 0 (initial batch size),α>1(step decay factor),S(an array of steps at which input scheduler cutsη byα),T(total training steps) η←η 0,B←B 0 fort←1toTdo ift∈Sthen η←η/ √α; B←B·α; end end Equation 4 describes the NSGD update rule, which is a crucial component of de- signing Seesaw. 3.2 Achievable Speedups While our theory is established for step decay schedulers, in practice we approximate cosine decay with a step decay by considering a decay ofα, and passing the times (as measured in tokens) where the cosine would cut the learning rate by α as input to Seesaw. Then, at these points, we instead cut the learning rate by√α and increase the batch size byβ, where the schedulers are equivalent in terms of loss as long as we keep the productα√β fixed. Lemma 1(Maximum Theoretical Speedup under Cosine Decay).Consider a baseline training process of T total steps using a constant batch size and a cosine learning rate scheduleη(t) =η 0 cos(πt 2T ). Final validation losses picked at the best learning rate (for the cosine annealing scheduler) for each batch size, forα= 1.1 . Similar to the OLMo training codebase, we enable z-loss during training, but provide ablations over it in Appendix E showing that it does not affect the model performance at our scales. Namely, we train 150M models at fixed batch size and Chinchilla scale, and we approximate cosine decay with a step decay scheduler that halves the learning rate at the token counts where the cosine schedule’s learning rate would halve. We hypothesise that beyond a certain batch size, it is not 7 109 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0Validation Loss B=1024 109 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0Validati