REAL METHOD of "Embedding-Based Context-Aware Reranker" (arXiv 2510.13329v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 EMBEDDING-BASEDCONTEXT-AWARERERANKER Ye Yuan1, 2∗, Mohammad Amin Shabani3, Siqi Liu3 1McGill University, 2Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 3RBC Borealis ABSTRACT Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems rely on retrieving relevant ev- idence from a corpus to support downstream generation. Many state-of-the-art (SOTA) reranking methods, despite uti- lizing powerful large pretrained language models with potentially high infer- ence costs, still neglect the aforementioned challenges. Therefore, we propose Embedding-BasedContext-AwareReranker(EBCAR), a lightweight reranking framework operating directly on embeddings of retrieved passages with enhanced cross-passage understandings through the structural information of the passages and a hybrid attention mechanism, which captures both high-level interactions across documents and low-level relationships within each document. A typical RAG pipeline consists of a retriever, identifying relevant passages from a large corpus, and a reranker, reordering these candidates to surface the most useful evidence for downstream generation. To support fine-grained retrieval, modern pipelines often rely on passage-level indexing, where a long document is split into shorter fixed-size passages for retrieval. This chunking process refines the granularity of retrieval and improves the readability of retrieved content for downstream models (Xu et al., 2024a; Jiang et al., 2024). While long-context encoders and embedding models have recently emerged (Zhang et al., 2024; Warner et al., 2025; Boizard et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2024), passage-level retrieval remains the dominant design choice in many deployed systems due to its effectiveness and efficiency (Wu et al., 2024; Conti et al., 2025). (2021) estimates the probability that one passage is more relevant than another given the query.(iii)Listwise methods, in contrast, op- erate over the entire set of retrieved candidates at once. Recently, inference-time methods have been proposed that prompt an LLM to compute calibrated attention-based scores across the retrieved passages (Chen et al., 2025). First, across pointwise, pairwise, and listwise paradigms, most rerankers rely on feeding the raw text of retrieved passages and the query into large pretrained language models (PLMs) for scoring. These encodings are processed by a transformer encoder equipped with ahybrid attention mechanism, comprising two complementary multi-head attention modules: Both modules operate on the same input representations but differ in their attention scopes. The shared full attention allows the query and all passage embeddings to attend to one another, capturing global interactions across retrieved passages. In contrast, the dedicated masked attention restricts attention scopes to the passages originating from the same documents, as determined by their docu- ment IDs. • We propose a hybrid attention architecture that incorporates structural signals, such as doc- ument identity and passage position, through positional encodings, and combines shared full and dedicated masked attention modules to enhance context-aware reranking. existing context- aware methods to enhance retrieval systems, the design of reranking methods, and the evaluation protocols used to assess their capabilities. Contextual Retrieval.Prior work has proposed several methods to enhance retrieval systems with broader contextual understanding beyond isolated passages. For instance, late chunking (G ¨unther et al., 2025), semantic chunking (Qu et al., 2025), and hierarchical retrieval (Arivazhagan et al., 2023; Choe et al., 2025) aim to improve retrieval granularity by better aligning the unit of retrieval with semantic boundaries or document structure. These methods operate at the retrieval or gener- ation stage and have proven effective in enhancing RAG pipelines. it can be integrated seamlessly into RAG pipelines that already incorporate context- aware retrieval or generation strategies, providing an additional layer of cross-passage inference during candidate reranking. (iii)Listwise methods score or reorder the entire set of retrieved passages jointly. While earlier methods treated this holistically using traditional architectures, most recent listwise approaches leverage large language models (LLMs) in different ways, leading to three main subcategories in practice.Prompt-only rerankingdirectly queries a powerful LLM, e.g., GPT-3.5or GPT-4, to re- turn a ranked list of passages in a single forward pass. Similarly, FIRST (Gangi Reddy et al., 2024) and FIRST-Mistral (Chen et al., 2024) use the logits of the first generated token as a ranking signal, while PE-rank (Liu et al., 2025) compresses passage context into a single embedding for efficient listwise reranking. To address these limitations, we evaluate our proposed EBCAR on ConTEB (Conti et al., 2025), a benchmark originally developed to assess retrievers’ use of document-wide context, which we use as a challenging testbed to evaluate rerankers’ ability to infer across multiple retrieved passages in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios. 3 METHODOLOGY Rerankers aim to refine a list of candidate passages retrieved for a query, producing a final rank- ing that better reflects passage relevance. 3.2 EMBEDDING-BASEDCONTEXT-AWARERERANKER Architecture.To capture both inter-document and intra-document dependencies among candidate passages, we propose a hybrid-attention-based reranking architecture, EBCAR, that operates on pre- computed dense embeddings. We con- catenate the query with the enriched passage embeddings along the sequence length axis to form an input sequence, as shown in Figure 2, which is then processed by a stack ofMmodified Transformer encoder layers. Each Transformer encoder layer employs a hybrid attention mechanism composed of two modules. Theshared full attentionmodule is a standard multi-head attention mechanism that allows the query and all passages to attend to one another freely, capturing global relevance and inter-document re- lationships. In contrast, thededicated masked attentionmodule restricts each passage’s attention to only those passages within the same document, plus the query, enabling fine-grained modeling of intra-document coherence. Formally, the attention score of this module is computed as: Training Objective.Given a queryqand a set of candidate passages{x 1, . The hybrid attention mechanism combines a shared full