REAL METHOD of "IDER: IDEMPOTENT EXPERIENCE REPLAY FOR RELIABLE CONTINUAL LEARNING" (arXiv 2603.00624v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, existing uncertainty-aware continual learning methods suffer from high computational overhead and incompatibility with mainstream replay methods. Specifically, we first adapt the training loss to make model idempotent on current data streams. We propose the IDER method, which can be directly applied to many recent rehearsal-based continual learning methods, resulting in less calibration error and significant improvements in FAA with less parameter growth compared with NPCL. (2024b) empirically demonstrate that if a deep network f takes as input a vector x and a second auxiliary variable that can either be the ground truth label y corresponding to x or a neutral uninformative signal 0 and is trained so that f(x,0) =f(x, y) =y , then the distance ||f(x, f(x,0))−f(x,0)|| correlates strongly with the prediction error. Both combined with naive rehearsal-based method experience replay (ER) (Riemer et al., 2019), compared with NPCL, our approach achieves lower calibration error evaluated by Expected Calibration Error (ECE) (Guo et al., 2017), higher accuracy, and requires smaller parameter numbers, as is shown in Figure 1. Firstly, we adapt the training loss to train the current model to be idempotent with data from the current task. Secondly, we introduce idempotence distillation loss for both buffer data and the current data stream to enforce idempotence between last task model checkpoint ft−1 and current model ft. Our approach can be integrated into existing CL methods and experiments show that this simple change boosts both prediction reliability and final accuracy by a large margin. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • We propose a novel framework for continual learning based on the idempotent property, which is a simple and robust method. Our method demonstrates that fundamental mathematical properties can be effectively utilized to address catastrophic forgetting for CL. Regularization-based methods primarily rely on regularization loss to penalize changes in parameter space of the model (Farajtabar et al., 2020; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Rehearsal-based Method (Chaudhry et al., 2019) use a memory buffer to store task data and replay them during new task training. Architecture-based methods (Rusu et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2022) incrementally expand the network to allocate distinct parameters for preserving each task’s knowledge. CLSER (Arani et al., 2022) introduce a fast module for plastic knowledge and a slow learning module for stable knowledge. The Idempotent Generative Network (IGN) (Shocher et al., 2023) firstly proposes this idea in deep learning for generative modeling and it has the capability of producing robust outputs in a single step. In a typical class-incremental learning setting, a model f is trained on sequential tasks T= T1,T 2, ...,Tt Each task T consists of data points and these data points are unique within each task, which means Tt ={(x i, yi)}Nt i=1 and Ti ∩ Tj =∅ . The optimization objective is to minimize the overall loss over all the tasks: 3.3 STANDARDIDEMPOTENTMODULE:TRAINING THENETWORKIDEMPOTENT First, we rely on the model we train being idempotent. To achieve this, Standard Idempotent Module is used for training the model on data from the current task. (2024a;b), when learning new tasks, we minimize the loss which consists of two cross-entropy losses obtained by the logits from the first and second forward propagation of model and the ground truthy: Probability of predicting each task at the end of training for models trained on CIFAR- 10 with 500 buffer size. 3 illustrates this in the case of a network trained on data from the first task on CIFAR-100. We then modify the idempotence distillation loss to be: Our method consists of two modules for continual learning: (1) Standard Idempotent Module that trains current model idempotent with data from the current task. (2020), which only aligns the final output probabilities, our method anchors the model’s representation to the stable manifold already learned by the frozen model, thereby maintaining balanced predictive performance across all tasks, as is shown in Figure 4. 3.5 OVERALLOBJECTIVE We introduce idempotence into an experience replay (ER) framework (Riemer et al., 2019), where we keep a buffer M storing training examples from old tasks. During continual learning, the current model ft is trained on the batch from data stream of the current task Tt using the adapted training loss Lice in Eq. LIDER =L ice +αL ide +βL rep-ice.(8) In addition, our method is simple and robust, which can be combined with other methods, such as BFP (Gu et al., 2023), to achieve higher performances. 4.1 RESULTS Comparison with the state-of-the-art methods.We evaluate our method against state-of-the-art continual learning approaches across three benchmark datasets with different memory buffer sizes: Our method outperforms all rehearsal-based methods on three datasets. Notably, our method outperforms the second best method BFP by up to 3 % on CIFAR-10, which shows that our method remains highly effective even on a small-scale benchmark. Layer Selection CIFAR-100 Tiny-ImageNet Shallower (5th layer) 40.51 42.10 Deeper (13th layer) 43.09 42.28 Ours (9th layer) 44.82 43.05 Idempotence improves forgetting.The Figure 7 (b) shows Final Forgetting (FF) measured on the Split CIFAR-100 dataset with different buffer sizes. On training time.Figure 7 (a) compares the training times of various methods. In practice, IDER only adds one extra forward pass, whereas X-DER involves additional training components (e.g., additional update steps beyond standard replay), leading to notably higher runtime.This highlights IDER’s practicality as a lightweight and effective method. Our approach adapts the training loss and introduces idempotence distillation loss for CL methods to encourage . (2024a) first train the model to satisfy f(x,0)≈y and f(x, y)≈y for each pair (x, y)by minimizing the following loss: Ltrain =∥f(x,0)−y∥+∥f(x, y)−y∥.(9) Then they define the uncertainty loss as: First, we propose Lice to train model idempotent for sequential tasks. Lide = X (x,y)∈Tt,M ∥ft(x, ft(x,0))−f t−1(x, ft(x,0))∥ 2 2 .(14) First, according to the same input for ft and ft−1 in eq 14, this idempotent distillation loss could serve as a standard regularization loss : Bt-SNEVISUALIZATION OF VARIOUS METHODS In this section, we show more t-SNE visualization of various methods on first task testing data on CIFAR-100 with 500 buffer size. F