REAL METHOD of "Setting up for failure: automatic discovery of the neural mechanisms of cognitive errors" (arXiv 2512.04808v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, previous approaches for building models of recurrent neural network (RNN) dynamics that explain behaviour required iterative refinement of architectures and/or optimization objectives, resulting in a piecemeal, and mostly heuristic, human-in-the-loop process. First, as the amount of behavioural data that can be collected in experiments is often too limited to train RNNs, we use a non- parametric generative model of behavioural responses to produce surrogate data for training RNNs. typical procedure involves training an RNN to perform optimally in a task, without relating to real behaviour. our novel method can replicate subject behaviour, by training on surrogate training data. To make training feasible, we generate synthetic data using a descrip- tive generative model, and use this to train our RNN (Figure 1). The second challenge is defining a suitable training objective for the RNN so that they can generate complex (for example, multimodal (Bays et al., 2009) or skewed (Fritsche et al., 2020; Resulaj et al., 2009)) continuous response distributions often found in experiments. Previously used methods for training RNNs are not appropriate for this. Instead, by framing elicitation of a behavioural output as generating samples in Euclidean space, we train the RNN using a training criterion inspired by diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), a state-of-the-art class of generative neural models for complex, continuous distributions. We adapt the training procedure used for diffusion models to work within an RNN, harnessing their flexibility in sampling from complex distributions. We address this gap by showing that our approach produces neural circuits that generate rich, realistic response 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 distributions by directly training networks to perform swap errors. The exact form of F and G vary across studies; in this work, we use a dendritic tree architecture for each neuron (Appendix B; Lyo and Savin (2024)), and interpret the output of the network - a simple linear projection of the firing rates - as a colour estimate on the colour circle. More details are provided in §3, and discussion of our choice of architecture is provided in Appendix B - namely, we chose this architecture to be sufficiently expressive for the task posed, while also maintaining a biologically plausible connectivity structure. Previous attempts to train RNNs that generate samples typically train RNNs on task-optimality or moment-matching criteria (Echeveste et al., 2020). The DDPM describes a non-stationary transition kernel pϕ(xτ+1 |xτ , τ), and is trained by maximising a hierarchical evidence lower bound (ELBO) of the one-step denoising of the corrupted data. We equate timesteps within the trial to timesteps in the DDPM denoising process, and use this objective to train the RNN to generate realistic samples from the response distribution. This is not an obstacle training for task-optimality – task variables such as stimulus features and target responses can be generated procedurally – but it is when training directly on behaviour – producing human or animal behavioural datasets is prohibitively costly at the scales required for training networks. For this reason, and because of the sophisticated response distributions elicited from even simple WM tasks, we choose this as the testbed for our method. Again, we emphasise that the use of VWM and BNS is one instantiation of our method, and that its ethos of fitting directly to suboptimal behaviour extends beyond this domain, which we discuss briefly in §5. 3 METHODS Network architectureOur RNN models a population of n densely connected cortical pyramidal neurons1. Forindex-cuednetworks, only the stimuli colours are provided as individual ordered scalars in [−π,+π) , and the cue as an 1Constants used in defining the architecture/training processes are declared in Appendix G. DDPM-style trained RNNs accurately captures swap errors in training data, unlike ablated task-optimal networks.Adotted lines are the target swap rate used to generate the synthetic training data for various RNNs, and solid lines are average swap rates inferred from fitting BNS to RNN- generated behaviour after they are trained on this synthetic data (Appendix A; Radmard et al. decreasing probe distance beyond the minimum margin between items seen during training to induce confusion, and increasing process noise variance beyond training conditions to increase misselection likelihood. To train for task performance, a mean squared error (MSE) loss on the discrepancy between this 2D estimate and the report feature of the cued item embedded on the circle inR 2 suffices (Appendices A, D). TrainingInstead of training for task optimality, we adapt the training procedure used for generative diffusion models (§2; Ho et al. We apply the DDPM training objective only to x, not the full activity vectofr r, equating timesteps after cue offset to timesteps in the DDPM denoising process. The network is trained to undo this process at each timestep of the second delay, with the transition kernel mean provided by discretising the continuous noiseless RNN dynamics (equation 1) projected to the behavioural subspace: This dependence on previous timesteps means training requires simulation of the full trial trajectory in sequence. Because valid application of the DDPM criterion (§2) requires training examples of noised data (xτ ) to be drawn from the marginal distribution of the noising process, i.e.q(xτ |xT ), we employ teacher-forcing during training to ensure that the distribution of trajectories of xτ stay in distribution. The training algorithm is summarised in algorithm 1, with full details provided in Appendix D. Algorithm 1Summary of training with teacher-forcing - full algorithm in Appendix D. Example sample sets, coloured by the associated estimate, are shown for some of these in Figure 3C, with the multimodality achievable with our method contrasting the unimodal distribution of estimates produced by task-optimised networks (top row). Even training with our DDPM-based method with a no-swap target distribution does not achieve this rapid increase during the cue period. This method is based on training linear decoders on non-swap trials, then projecting neural activity onto the line connecting thesenominalrepresentations to representations that arise due tomisbinding,cue misinterpretation, oritem misselection. Its success was contrasted with naïve training met