REAL METHOD of "Cartridges: Lightweight and general-purpose long context representations via self-study" (arXiv 2506.06266v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Instead, we propose SELF -STUDY , a training recipe in which we generate synthetic conversations about the corpus and train the CARTRIDGE with a context-distillation objective. We call the trained KV cache representing the corpus a “CARTRIDGE .” At inference time, we load the trained CARTRIDGE , append the user’s messages, and decode. Second, CARTRIDGES should replicate ICL’s structural awareness—its ability to reason over document structure, and understand how distant parts of a corpus relate or depend on each other (an ability that degrades when using lossy KV-cache compression methods). The natural baseline approach is to train a CARTRIDGE with a next-token prediction objective on the raw corpus. To address these challenges and produce general, structurally awareCARTRIDGES for any text corpus, we propose an automated method called SELF -STUDY . Training on these lets us avoid training on the same exact text multiple times and improves generality (see Figure 3). We train on the synthetic conversations using a context-distillation objective [13, 79], which aligns the CARTRIDGE -augmented model’s next-token distributions with the distributions of the model with the corpus in context. In summary, given a large corpus of text, our goal is to train a small virtual KV cache, termedCARTRIDGE , that when used by the model, mimics the conversational behavior of the model with the entire corpus in context. To do this, we generate synthetic conversations and train the CARTRIDGE on them with a context distillation objective — a recipe we call SELF -STUDY . The earliest methods in this line of work inject knowledge with next-token prediction objectives on the corpus [ 49, 93, 113]. One set of approaches focus on making the prompt smaller—explicit methods alter the prompt text through summa- rization and filtering [ 21, 42, 55, 70, 109], while implicit methods compress prompt representations into a set of “soft” tokens [19, 28, 51, 62, 72, 104]. Compared with our work, these methods use relatively little compute to compress the KV cache. Unlike SELF -STUDY and the compression approaches discussed above, which can be readily applied to any pre-trained Transformer, these architectural changes typically require retraining the model from scratch or using complex architecture conversion techniques [108]. In particular, grouped-query attention [3] is the de-facto multi-head attention variant, used in frontier language models like Llama 3 [ 25]. Other variants — such as multi-head latent attention [57] or linear attention [6, 31] — are gaining popularity and feature in large-scale reasoning models [33] and hybrid models [14, 52, 87]. In contrast with our work, these architectures need to be trained from scratch, they have not been validated on large scale models, and do not match the quality of attention on recall-intensive tasks [6, 9]. CARTRIDGES trained with next-token prediction over C, CARTRIDGES trained with SELF -STUDY , full ICL, and truncated ICL, a prompt compression method in which we truncate the C to the first k tokens. CARTRIDGES trained with next-token prediction performs well on memorization queries, which resemble it’s training distribution, but cannot generalize to other queries like the other methods. y[i] = i ∑ j=1 exp(q[i]⊤k[j]/ √ d)v[j] ∑i t=1 exp(q[i]⊤k[t]/ √ d) (1) where weight matrices Wq, Wk and Wv for each layer are learned during training. A self-supervised method for training C ARTRIDGES In this section, we describe SELF -STUDY , a simple approach for training a CARTRIDGE Z on any corpus of text. 7 4.1 Self-supervised synthetic data to avoid overfitting Towards training general CARTRIDGES , we propose using LLM generated synthetic data to generate our training dataset Dtrain. 4.2 S ELF -S TUDY context-distillation objective Given a fine-tuning dataset Dtrain, we adapt standard techniques from the model distillation literature [47, 48, 79]. We use a classic distillation objective [ 35] that minimizes the KL-divergence between the teacher 8 Cartridges ICL Summary Constant Compute Baselines LongHealth MTOB (KE) QASPER with different sizes OursSelf-study duration (# of training steps) Self-study duration (# of training steps) Figure 5: model and prompt compression methods, the size of the CARTRIDGE , and the size of the compressed KV cache for KV cache compression methods like DuoAttention. We also show that freezing the attention sink (the first token in the key and value vectors) improves training stability (Figure 10). Using the same SELF -STUDY synthetic data for both objectives, we compare the context- distillation objective with a simpler next-token prediction objective. improved shared-prefix attention kernels [22, 44, 103]) that would make SELF -STUDY training procedure more efficient. Freezing the attention sink A small yet important detail of training a CARTRIDGE is that we do not let the first token’s key and value vectors to be trainable. We observed that when training a CARTRIDGE , allowing those key and value vectors to be trainable led to training instability (see Figure 10). 22 First k tokens of corpus 8192 Self-study duration (# of training steps) 2048 Random vectors with different size Cartridges Random tokens with different size Cartridges with different size Cartridges 81922048 81922048 Figure 9: Frozen ﬁrst token with 4096 token Cartridge trained on LongHealth with Self-study Trained ﬁrst token Self-study duration (# of training steps) Self-study duration (# of training steps) LongHealthMMLU Figure 10: data-generation and objective In SELF -STUDY training we use a seeded data-generation process and a context-distillation training objective (see Section 4). 5 seed prompts Self-study Seed PromptsSelf-study duration (# of training steps) Self-study duration (# of training steps)1 seed prompt LongHealth MTOB (KE) QASPER Figure 11: Training Objective In Section 4, we describe the context-distillation objective we use [ 13, 47, 79]. We finally 24 Context-distillation 2048 with different sizes Self-study duration (# of training steps) Self-study duration (# of training steps) 512 Next-token prediction 2048 with different sizes 512 LongHealth MTOB (KE) QASPER Figure 12: Given a set of LoRA modules for different upstream tasks and new unseen task with in-context examples, LoraHub dynamically weights the LoRAs and composes a new LoRA module for the task. These pairs are then used to train a LoRA adapter for a student model (identical to the teacher model, but w