REAL METHOD of "Differentiable Simulation of Hard Contacts with Soft Gradients for Learning and Control" (arXiv 2506.14186v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

1 arXiv:2506.14186v2 [cs.RO] 23 Mar 2026 as a convex optimization problem, where a constraint’s ability to generate force grows proportionally to the constraint violation. While common advice points to reducing the step size to improve gradient accuracy, using sufficiently small step sizes results in prohibitively slow simulation. MuJoCo’s documentation refers to theimpedanceas a “constraints ability to generate force” as it determines aref and weights the cost for applying constraint forces in Eq. If K∗ solely contains pyramidal or elliptic cone constraints, then problem (2) reduces to a convex problem that is solved efficiently via an exact Newton method. 3 (MJX row), at the default integration step of 0.002 s, we observe that the loss is oscillating at a high frequency, which results in large fluctuations of the gradient. For ideal-elastic collisions, we observe sawtooth-like loss oscillations in L, resulting in the gradient ∇q0 L withthe wrong sign, independently of the stepsize as observed by Hu et al. Unfortunately, simply reducing the step size is not a practical solution, as it necessitates extremely small steps that substantially increase the computational and memory demands of gradient computation. If the error is smaller than a given threshold, the step is accepted; otherwise, the step is rejected and the procedure is repeated with a different stepsize chosen by a feedback controller. −4 −2 0 2 4 0.025 0.040 Loss −0.2 0.0 0.2 Gradient DiﬀMJX goal loss Figure 8: At the first timestep, a force F is exerted on the white ball such that it may hit the black ball. In the following, we proposecontacts from distance(CFD), a method for computing contact forces for positive signed distances r in the gradient computation of a penalty-based simulation that yields informative gradients even if objects are not in contact. Below, as a concrete example, we propose a method tailored to MuJoCo. 3d_mjx = _forward(m, d, cfd=False) # Compute system acceleration without CFD 4d_cfd = _forward(m, d, cfd=True) # Compute system acceleration using CFD 5grad_replace_fn = lambda x_mjx, x_cfd: While our approach requires the simulator’s forward pass to be computed twice, the gradient is only evaluated once. In Section C.2, we evaluate the straight-through-trick with different autodiff techniques, including “Discretize-then-optimize” and “Optimize-then-discretize.” 5 EVALUATION In the following, we demonstrate the use of DiffMJX and CFD for learning physics parameters and computing robot control actions using gradient descent with simulator gradients. 6 0 50 100 gradient step 60 80 100 120 140cube width in mm MJX 0 50 100 gradient step DiﬀMJX Experiment setup no CFD CFD true width Figure 9:Left:Estimation of a cube’s side length in MJX via gradient descent using multi-step ahead pre- dictions.Right:Experimental setup for collecting cube toss data. real ball real ball simulated ball simulated ball Figure 10:Left:If the initial ball radius p is set too small, then the gradient ∇pL re- sulting from a one-step-ahead prediction is zero.Right:Large initial constraint pene- tration results in large gradients∇ xk L. Dataset and training setup.We use the Contactnets dataset (Pfrommer et al., 2021) which consists of 550 trajectories of a 10 cm acrylic cube that has been repeatedly tossed onto a wooden table. For training, trajectories are split into segments of length five such that the simulator is tasked to unroll four future steps starting from the initial state. For systems with stiff dynamics, we favor multi-step-ahead predictions over one-step-ahead predictions, as they capture the cumulative effects of prediction errors over time. At every plan step in the MPC loop, we refine a sequence of controls over a 256-step horizon. In the gradient-based planner, we compute gradients by backpropagating the differentiable cost computed on the rollout of the current plan through the MJX simulator. Finally, the resulting plan is executed for 16 steps in simulation, after which the planning procedure is repeated with the previous plan as a warm start. Thus, first-order methods using differentiable simulation should be able to tackle more complex control problems. In both tasks, the loss consists of the L2 distance between the cube center and the target location, as well as a squared loss on the difference of quaternions describing the cube and target orientation.Top:Simulation cost evolution of gradient-based MPC, with and without contacts from distance (CFD), vs sampling-based MPC. Stabilization of constraints and integrals of motion in dynamical systems.Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering, 1(1):1–16, 1972. Complementary-based contact models compute constraint forces as a solution to a constrained optimization problem ei- ther in the form of a nonlinear-complementary problem (NCP) (Taylor et al., 2022) or linear-complementary problem (LCP) (Russ Tedrake, 2019; Coumans & Bai, 2016; Heiden et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024). Briefly, contact forces are computed by solving a global optimization problem, in which the ability of a constraint to generate force is modulated by the geometric penetration depth at the contact interface. The loss and gradient are computed for the cube toss at an initial velocity of vx =−2.0 with contact settings solref=[0.005 1.0] and solimp=[0.0 0.95 0.001 0.5 2] as depicted in Fig. Standard fixed-stepsize MJX integrators have red colors, fixed-stepsize integrators in Diffrax have green color, and adaptive-stepsize integrators in Diffrax have blue color (also marked by ∗). The best-performing solver is the Tsit5 solver (Tsitouras, 2011), which is a 5th order explicit Runge–Kutta method with an embedded 4th order method for adaptive step sizing. To obtain accurate gradients, one can use a constant stepsize integrator with a sufficiently small stepsize which inevitably results in slow integration. Discretize-then-optimize (also referred to as unrolling) and optimize-then-discretize (also referred to as backsolving) (Chen et al., 2018; Kidger, 2021). Another potential issue is that discretize-then-optimize inherently computes gradients of the dis- cretized dynamics, rather than the true continuous dynamics. This can lead to interesting failure cases in which even in the limit of the stepsize going to zero, the computed gradient is different from the true gradient of the continuous dynamics. One of the intuitive potential benefits of optimize-then-discretize is that the adaptiv