REAL METHOD of "Benchmarking Bias Mitigation Toward Fairness Without Harm from Vision to LVLMs" (arXiv 2602.03895v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

While numerous bias mitigation methods have been proposed, comparing the effectiveness of bias mitigation methods remains difficult due to heteroge- neous datasets, inconsistent fairness metrics, isolated evaluation of vision versus multi-modal models, and insufficient hyperparameter tuning that undermines fair comparisons. We introduce NH-Fair, a unified benchmark for fairness without harm that spans both vision models and large vision–language models (LVLMs) under standardized data, metrics, and training protocols, covering supervised and zero-shot regimes. In fairness research, there are usually inconsistent experimental settings when comparing different methods, e.g., arbitrary choice of optimizer, different hyperparameters, and insufficiently trained baselines. How do these methods perform in utility, fairness, and overhead, under the same setting with comprehensive hyperparameter sweeping? And can they outperform a carefully trained ERM? • What makes ERM strong—and how far can it go? There is a practice–research gap: NH-Fair unifies evaluation across classical vision models and vision–language models, providing broader insights into fairness comparisons of architectures, pretraining strategies, and model scales. Beyond benchmarking both classical and recent fairness algorithms, we systematically evaluate the role of training choices, the overhead of existing methods, and the performance of state-of-the-art LVLMs. We offer an extensive comparison of recent and classic bias mitigation algorithms, assessing both fairness and accuracy to determine if current methods can achieve equitable performance without compromise. In practice, prioritize augmentation strategies before exploring a wide range of spe- cialized algorithms; this pathway most often achieves fairness without utility loss or overhead. principle of fairness without harm, which augments group fairness with a no-harm condition.Let herm denote the baseline classifier trained via unconstrained empirical risk minimization (ERM): Algorithmic methods, by contrast, alter the training process through adversarial training or fairness-aware objectives. Together, these methods span both established baselines and recent state-of-the-art techniques and include pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing methods. Conventional selection methods, which prioritize average accuracy or loss, often reinforce majority-group performance while neglecting minorities. We then take the selected ERM model as a baseline and introduce a fairness-without-harm (FWH) procedure to assess whether alternative methods can improve fairness without materially degrading utility compared to the well-established ERM. (b) With the ERM baseline established, we classify models trained by bias-mitigation methods into four zones based on how their subgroup performance compares to the ERM. First, ML practitioners rarely conduct extensive testing of different fairness-specific algorithms and instead focus on tuning existing models. which training choices should be prioritized for fairness-sensitive applications? Second, many prior studies report fairness or utility gains while keeping core training parameters fixed across baselines and datasets. For each dataset–method pair, results are averaged over five runs, with the best ERM model selected under DTO criteria and the best models for mitigation meth- ods selected under FWH criteria. This suggests that increasing data variability can naturally mitigate biases, offering a lightweight and practical strategy for fairness-aware training without the need for explicit fairness constraints. Both GapReg and MCDP account for explicit fairness constraints in the loss functions, directly penalizing subgroup disparities. Here, we evaluate pre-trained multi-modal models, which are trained on massive, diverse datasets and are expected to generalize better. Model architectures, training procedures, and hyperparameters are documented in Appendix B.4 and Ap- pendix B.5. Last layer re-training is sufficient for robustness to spurious correlations. Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. By assigning group-specific models to different groups, our goal is to reduce the accuracy gap between different groups without sacrificing accuracy for any group (compared to the baseline classifier trained on data collected from all groups). • In-processing methods modify the training procedure by directly incorporating fairness constraints. Representative approaches include adversarial training, which encourages representations to be invariant to sensitive attributes (Madras et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2024b; Pham et al., 2023), and fairness-based regularization terms in the loss function (Chuang and Mroueh, 2021; Park et al., 2022; Zafar et al., 2019). • Post-processing methods adjust model outputs to better satisfy fairness criteria without retraining (Khalili et al., 2021a;b). data-centric methods, which intervene at the dataset or input level, and algorithmic methods, which modify the training process or outputs. (2019) leverages individuals’ sensitive attributes to train decoupled ML models, ensuring each group receives the best possible performance from its assigned model compared to a pooled model (trained on data from all groups) or the decoupled models of other groups. (2024) proposes a method using abstention, where a pre-trained ML model selectively defers certain predictions to human decision-makers, thus achieving group fairness without reducing accuracy. The algorithm then actively adds the highest-influence examples to the training data, inducing a targeted distribution shift that reduces disparity without harm. • Algorithmic methods – Decoupled Classifier (Ustun et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020): It trains separate classifiers for each sensitive group, allowing group -tailored decision boundaries and then aggregates their predictions. Concretely, a predictor is optimized to minimize task loss while an adversary is trained to predict sensitive at- tribute to enforce conditional independence. Fair Supervised Contrastive Loss (FSCL) integrates fairness consider- ations into a contrastive loss function. Gap Regularization embeds a chosen group-fairness metric, such as Demographic Parity, Equal Opportunity, and Equalized Odds, directly into the training loss function to balance both accuracy and fairness. MCDP uses a regularization approach similar to GapR