REAL METHOD of "Tactic: Adaptive Sparse Attention with Clustering and Distribution Fitting for Long-Context LLMs" (arXiv 2502.12216v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Prior methods enforce fixed token budgets for sparse attention, assuming a set number of tokens can approximate full atten- tion. However, these methods overlook variations in the importance of attention across heads, layers, and contexts. To address these limitations, we propose Tactic, a sparsity-adaptive and calibration-free sparse atten- tion mechanism that dynamically selects tokens based on their cumulative attention scores rather than a fixed token budget. By setting a target fraction of total attention scores, Tactic ensures that token selection naturally adapts to variations in attention sparsity. We show that Tactic outperforms existing sparse attention algorithms, achieving superior accuracy and up to 7.29× decode attention speedup. Fixed T oken Budget (Budget = 3) T acticOutput Output Context 1 Step 1 Full Attention Score Lower Attention Score Higher Attention Score × Context 1 Step 5 Context 2 Step 1 T arget: Fixed-budget-based methods may select excessive tokens or have a large difference from full attention score. In contrast, Tactic dynamically selects tokens to efficiently approximate full attention based on a cumulative attention score, considering variation of sparsity across different query tokens and contexts. Some methods employ a global fixed to- ken budget (Tang et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), not accounting for variations in attention spar- sity across attention heads, and layers. In practice, some attention heads focus on significantly more tokens than oth- ers, and the level of sparsity fluctuates across layers. More adaptive methods (Cai et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2024) attempt to distribute token budgets more effec- tively using calibration data or predefined rules, but they remain constrained by static allocation and cannot adapt to query tokens and contexts, often leading to suboptimal approximations in different cases. To address the limitations of fixed-budget-based methods, we propose Tactic, a sparsity-adaptive and calibration-free post-training sparse attention mechanism that improves both the accuracy and efficiency of long-context LLM inference. Instead of enforcing a fixed budget, Tactic dynamically selects tokens starting from ones with the highest attention score to ensure that their cumula- tive attention scores (where attention score represents the softmax output of the Query-Key product) reach a target fraction of the full attention score. Second, since attention scores are multiplied by V vectors with similar norms, and the selected attention scores cumulatively reach at least a fraction of the total attention score, a cumulative attention score target guarantees, unlike token budgets in prior works, a bounded difference between sparse and full attention (see Sec. To minimize the number of tokens selected (i.e., loads from memory), the optimal way is to select tokens following a descending order of attention score until the cumulative attention score surpasses P . However, unlike fixed budget-based methods that simply stop at a fixed to- ken count, Tactic must track cumulative attention score in real time, requiring the exact attention score values for each token, making the selection process more complex. After approximating token sorting, Tactic estimates the at- tention score for each token by leveraging the observation that attention scores follow a smooth distribution. To balance efficiency and accuracy, Tactic performs full attention on newly generated tokens and updates the clustering every fixed number of decoding steps (e.g., 2048). • A detailed analysis of the dynamic nature of attention sparsity across heads, layers, queries, and contexts. • Tactic, a sparsity-adaptive attention algorithm that uses clustering and distribution fitting to dynamically deter- mine the token budget for achieving cumulative atten- tion score targets. Large Language Models LLMs consist of transformer blocks, each with an attention and a feed-forward module. In the attention module, input embeddings are projected into Query ( Q), Key ( K), and Value (V ) vectors. For a given Q vector, attention weights wi for the i-th token are computed as ( QK ⊤ √ d )i, then normal- ized via softmax to obtain attention scores. This result is then processed by the feed-forward module, with residual connections and layer normalization refining the final token representation. Analysis In this section, we first analyze the intrinsic sparsity in attention and how this sparsity affects downstream task per- formance (Sec. We then present the draw- backs of existing fixed token budget approaches and pro- pose cumulative attention score as the new target (Sec. Intrinsic Sparsity in Self-Attention Mechanisms In the decode phase, for one request, assuming there are n previous tokens, the attention formula in Eq. Rethinking Attention Approximation The sparse attention methods can be formulated as ˜o(I) = X i∈I ˜sivi, ˜si = exp( qk⊤ i√ d ) P i∈I exp( qk⊤ i√ d ) (3) where I is the index set of tokens selected by the sparse attention method, I ⊂ [n]. Distance of attention output to full attention of Quest (Tang et al., 2024) and setting cumulative attention score threshold P, measured with Llama3.1-8B-Instruct model. Each dot represents the distance of one attention computation identified by (head index, layer index, decode step). 4b highlights variation in sparsity across layers, where earlier layers exhibit lower sparsity compared to later ones, similarly making it inefficient to select a fixed number of tokens from different layers. Motivated by the diversity of sparsity patterns across heads and layers, some works, including AdaKV(Feng et al., 2024) and PyramidKV(Cai et al., 2024), fix the total budget |I| but use calibration data or assumptions to statically assign different budgets to different layers and heads. Specifically, we define p(I) as the cumulative attention score of tokens in I, which is p(I) = X i∈I si = P i∈I exp( qk⊤ i√ d ) Pn i=1 exp( qk⊤ i√ d ) (5) These cumulative attention score targets offer two key ad- vantages over fixed token budgets. However, unlike previous methods, Tactic also requires the attention score values for each token to track the cumulative sum of selected tokens in real-time. Tactic then models the distribu- tion of attention score with a fitted curve and determines the tokens to meet the desired cumulative attention score threshold. After token selection, Tactic handles the Group Query Attention (