REAL METHOD of "Ada-Diffuser: Latent-Aware Adaptive Diffusion for Decision-Making" (arXiv 2605.16054v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To reflect the autoregressive nature of sequential decision making, we introduce acausal denoising schedulethat aligns the denoising steps with the underlying causal structure, drawing inspiration from recent advances in autoregressive diffusion models (Ho et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024b; Sand-AI, 2025). Fortemporal-block-wise latent identification, during training, we propose adenoise-then-refineprocedure that iteratively alternates between denoising the observations and refining latent estimates. Here, the superscript t denotes diffusion steps, T denotes the planning horizon, x0 is a clean subsequence sampled from the expert trajectory τ, and αt controls the variance schedule at diffusion step t. Here, gray tdenotes diffusion steps, T denotes the planning horizon, x0 is a clean100 subsequence sampled from the expert trajectory ε, and ϑt controls the variance schedule at diffusion101 step t. Here, gray tdenotes diffusion steps, T denotes the planning horizon, x0 is a clean100 subsequence sampled from the expert trajectory ε, and ϑt controls the variance schedule at diffusion101 step t. We then describe the two modules of Ada-Diffuser in detail (Fig. The complete algorithmic pseudocode of the training and inference procedures are given in App. The denoising model ϵθ is trained to predict the noise added during the forward diffusion process via the objective: Here, the superscript t indexes diffusion steps, and should not be confused with the environment time step indices within the trajectory. While multi-step action generation methods (e.g., DP (Chi et al., 2023)) can also be viewed as a form of plan- ning (Zhu et al., 2023), for generality, we categorize such settings under the policy framework. multi-step action generation (Ta >1 ), as in DP, and single-step decision-making (Ta = 1), as in IDQL (Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023). Under this mechanism, each time step within a local temporal block is assigned a denoising schedule that depends both on its temporal distance from the conditioning anchor and on the inferred latent variables. ,xkT T−1 , ˆc0:T ), where the first observation x0 has been fully denoised and other observations are partially denoised, followed by 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 the second step: Hence, guided by this insight with preserving the causal structure of the generative process, we propose a noveldenoise-and-refine mechanismthat alternates between denoising the observable sequences and refining the latent estimates, and is applied consistently during both training and inference to ensure high-quality latent context recovery in an online manner. We introduce how we implement this during training and inference. Training:Given a noisy input xkt t with noise level kt, we first sample an initial latent context from the prior: To encourage the posterior latent to produce better re- constructions, we introduce acontrastive improvement loss: For each time step t, we begin by denoising xK t to an intermediate noise level k1 using ˆct sampled from the prior: We then obtain updatedˆct from the posterior latent distribution ˆcpost t ∼q ψ(ct |x 0 t−k:t−1,x k1 t ,x k2 t+1), which is conditioned on the denoised history, the intermediate step with noise level k1, and the next step with noise level k2. D.2) For latent factor identification, we use GRU (Cho et al., 2014) embedding with MLP layers as both prior and posterior encoders to produce Gaussian distribution over latents. We adopt the same setup as in (Xie et al., 2025), using a pre-trained visual encoder obtained via a V AE to learn the latent space from pixel observations. We then train a latent planner and an IDM using a diffusion-based approach. Here, we also consider ablations where (i) the entire latent identification module is removed, (ii) the latent identification network is frozen after the first 10% of training steps, and (iii) different numbers of latent updates are used. (i) removing the refinement step (w/o refine); (ii) removing zig-zag sampling (w/o zig-zag); (iii) replacing the causal noise schedule with a fixed noise level across time steps (vanilla diffusion) or with random noise scaling as in DF (Chen et al., 2024) (same NS, random NS). In particular, freezing the latent module makes the model perform poorly, because the latent context follows a temporal process and must continue adapting during training. Notably, we show that our method introduces no significant computational overhead in terms of training runtime and inference latency (App. Results across diverse benchmarks show substantial improvements, validating the effectiveness of our method not only in environments with designed latent factors but also in general settings where latent structure is implicit but influential. On the Identification Theory.What does the identification theory establish, and how does it inform algorithm design? The identification theory (Theorem 1) establishes that the distribution over latent variables can be provably recovered from observable trajectories using only a small temporal window, specifically, a small temporal block of four time steps. This “four-step” result has direct implications for algorithm design. On the Latent Identification.How is Stage 1 (Latent Identification) trained, and does it introduce additional computational overhead? In Stage 1, we train the latent identification module using an offline dataset, as commonly done in offline RL and imitation learning tasks. The diffusion model ϵθ is typically trained by minimizing a simplified objective (e.g., (Ho et al., 2020)), often an unweighted or equally weighted sum of these MSE terms over uniformly sampled diffusion stepsk∈[1, K]and datax 0 t : These losses, Lprior and Lpost, are specific instances of the simplified MSE loss objective in equation 34 with w(ki)≈1 , conditioned on the inferred contexts ˆcprior t and ˆcpost t respectively. For clarity, we omit the detailed step-by-step procedures for denoise-and-refine and zig-zag sampling (Lines 7–8, 11, and 19–22 in Algorithm 2; Lines 6–7 and 13 in Algorithm 3), as these are fully described in Section 4.3. D.2 ARCHITECTURECHOICES ANDHYPER-PARAMETERS We detail the architectural design choices and hyperparameter settings used for model components, loss functions, and training procedures across all Ada-Diffuser variants under different environ- ments and benchmarks. For the prior network, we use the output of the previous step’s latent distribution embedding 