REAL METHOD of "Dataset Distillation as Pushforward Optimal Quantization" (arXiv 2501.07681v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 DATASETDISTILLATION ASPUSHFORWARDOPTIMAL QUANTIZATION Hong Ye Tan UCLA University of Cambridge hyt35@math.ucla.edu Emma Slade Tangram Therapeutics GSK.ai emma.slade@tangramtx.com ABSTRACT Dataset distillation aims to find a small synthetic training set, such that training on the synthetic data achieves similar performance to training on a larger training dataset. On the other hand, disentangled methods bypass pixel-space optimization by matching data distributions and using generative tech- niques, leading to better computational complexity in terms of size of both training and distilled datasets. In particular, we link disentangled dataset distillation methods to the classical problem of optimal quantization, and are the first to demonstrate consis- tency of distilled datasets for diffusion-based generative priors. 1 INTRODUCTION Training powerful neural networks requires a large amount of data, and thus induces high computa- tional requirements.Dataset distillation(DD) targets this computational difficulty by changing the data, as opposed to other parts of training such as optimization or architecture (Wang et al., 2018). The DD objective consists of finding a synthetic training set, such that training a neural network on the synthetic data yields similar performance. Core-set methods find a subset of training data (as opposed to synthetic data) that achieve good training performance (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Feldman, 2020). Importance sampling methods accelerate training by weighting training data, finding examples that are more influential for training (Paul et al., 2021). 1.1 BI-LEVEL FORMULATION OF DATASET DISTILLATION Denote a training set (more generally, distribution of training data) by T , and the expected and empirical risks (test and training loss) by R and L respectively, evaluated for some parameter θ. The goal of DD is to find a synthetic dataset S (of given size) minimizing the test loss discrepancy 1 arXiv:2501.07681v3 [cs.LG] 6 Feb 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Training data distribution Low-dimensional latent space Distilled latent points and weights Distilled data distribution{(,)} (1) Encoding (2) Clustering (3) Decoding Figure 1: Using an encoder/decoder model, we map our high dimensional data to a low-dimensional space, which is then clustered using k-means. Approximations include replacing the minimum discrepancy objective with maximum test performance, replacing the learning algorithm Φ with an inner neural network optimization problem, and solving the outer minimization problem using gradient methods. Other methods include neural feature matching (Zhou et al., 2022; Loo et al., 2022) and the corresponding neural tangent kernel methods (Nguyen et al., 2021; 2020), representative matching (Liu et al., 2023b), and group robustness (Vahidian et al., 2024). For example, the ImageNet-1K dataset consists of 1.2M training images, totalling over 120GB of memory (Deng et al., 2009). The full dataset ImageNet-21K consists of over 14M images and takes up around 1.2TB of memory, which is generally infeasible to train expert models on, and makes backpropagation through network training steps impossible. (2024) proposesRealistic Diverse 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 and Efficient Dataset Distillation(RDED), which replaces the latent clustering objective with a patch-based adversarial objective. We proposeDataset Distillation by Optimal Quantization(DDOQ) in Algorithm 1, a DD algorithm based on clustering in a low-dimensional latent space. Compared to a recent disentangled method D4M, our proposed method has a smaller Wasserstein distance between the distilled latent points and latent data distribution, indicating better approximation. We algorithmically compare our proposed method with D4M and various common disen- tangled baselines on the ImageNet-1K dataset using the same generative diffusion model backbone, demonstrating significantly better classification accuracy at varied IPC bud- gets and better cross-architecture generalization. We provide a central comparison with SOTA disentangled and diffusion-based distillation methods, yielding competitive or better results than existing SOTA methods on ImageNet-1K and its subsets. Section 3.1 details the data distillation pipeline in a sequential manner, from distillation to training new models using the computed weights. Section 4 contains experiments of our proposed method against the previously SOTA D4M method as well as other recent SOTA baselines on the large-scale ImageNet-1K dataset. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 The CLVQ algorithm is presented in the appendix as Algorithm 2. CLVQ isequivalent to the mini-batch k-means methodwhen the step-sizes γi are chosen to be the reciprocals of the number of points per-cluster (Sculley, 2010; Pedregosa et al., 2011). The CLVQ algorithm produces points x= (x 1, ..., xK), but it remains to compute the associated weights approximating the measures of the V oronoi cellsµ(Ci) as in Proposition 1. There exists a (universal explicit) constant C=C(δ, T, R, d)∈ (0,+∞) such that if f:R d →R n is an L-Lipschitz function, then the difference in expectation satisfies ∥Eµδ [f]−E νδ [f]∥ ≤CLW2(µT , νT ).(9) In dataset distillation terms, f will typically be replaced by the gradient of a loss function. Moreover, when training a neural network on a distilled dataset given by optimal quantization, the gradients on the distilled dataset and full training dataset at each step will automatically be similar. 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1:Dataset Distillation by Optimal Quantization (DDOQ) Data:Training data and labels(T,L), pre-trained encoder-decoder pair(E,D), text encoderτ, latent diffusion modelU t, target IPC countK /* Step 1: cluster */ 2Compute and savek-means cluster centersz (L) k and cluster countsv (L) k ,k= 1, ..., K, L∈ L; 3Compute weightsw (L) k ←v (L) k / P j v(L) j ; /* Step 3: decode */ 4Compute class embeddingsemb =τ(L), L∈ L; 5Compute and save class distilled imagesS L ={x (L) k =D ◦ Ut(z(L) k ,emb)|k= 1, ..., K}; Result:Distilled imagesS= S L∈L SL 6To train a new networkf θ: Train new model (Validation) */ 7Train network using loss functionmin θ P (x,y,w) w·ℓ(x, y, θ) Table 1: Clustering.We then use the CLVQ (mini-batch k-means) algorithm on these samples to compute the K centroids and corresponding weights, as in Proposition 3. For a loss functio