REAL METHOD of "An Information-Theoretical Framework For Optimizing Experimental Design To Distinguish Probabilistic Neural Codes" (arXiv 2603.01387v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

While extensive psychophysical ev- idence supports the notion of the brain performing Bayesian computations, how uncertainty information is encoded in sensory neural populations remains elusive. Extensive be- havioral evidence demonstrates that humans and animals perform near optimally in perceptual tasks that require uncertainty estimation, strongly suggesting that sensory neural populations encode both task-relevant stimulus features and their associated uncertainty (Fiser et al., 2010; Pouget et al., 2013; Qamar et al., 2013; Ma & Jazayeri, 2014). B) Posterior coding hypothesis, exemplified by the neural sampling code (Hoyer & Hyv¨arinen, 2002), posits that early sensory populations readily encode the posterior distribution over hidden world state by inte- grating prior knowledge conveyed via feedback connections from higher cortical areas. Do early sensory populations encode the likelihood function over stimuli, or do they readily repre- sent the posterior distribution that incorporate prior knowledge? Thelikelihood coding hypothesis (Fig. Motivated by research on optimal stimulus design for psychophysics studies (Watson & Pelli, 1983; Madigan & Williams, 1987), electrophysiology experiment (Lewi et al., 2006; 2011), and efficient 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Figure 2:A decoding approach to differentiating probabilistic neural codes.A) An experimen- tal paradigm consists of two contextsc∈ {A, B}with context-specific prior distributionsp c(θ). B) Information gap∆ info, the difference in likelihood (blue) and posterior (orange) decoder perfor- mances, can indicate whether the underlying neural population encodes the likelihood function (left) or the posterior distributions (right). Our approach quantifies the expected difference in decodable information—which we term theinfor- mation gap∆ info—when applying neural network-based decoders to extract likelihood or posterior information from sensory neural populations following either coding hypothesis. 2 INFORMATION GAP We propose to determine whether early sensory populations encode likelihood functions or poste- rior distributions by examining how varying stimulus priors affects population responses. A decoding framework is leveraged to distinguish the probabilistic information content encoded in neural populations. 2B, decoder performance degrades (increase in cross- entropy loss) when attempting to extract mismatched probabilistic content: if a neural population encodes likelihood functions, a decoder trained to extract likelihood information should outperform one extracting posterior information, and vice versa for posterior-coding populations. Building on recent advances in neural de- coding (Walker et al., 2020), we employ deep neural network-based decoders that can effectively 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 extract the encoded information while incorporating the structural assumptions of each probabilistic coding hypothesis (Fig. Once the subjects are trained on both contexts and the task performance stabilizes, we probe how early sensory populations represent probabilistic information. Given neural population response vectorsr, our goal is to assess the difference in decoder per- formances between a likelihood decoderg L(r)and a posterior decoderg P(r), optimized through minimizing the cross-entropy loss to extract likelihood functions and posterior distributions, respec- tively. This quantity thus measures the expected increase in cross-entropy loss incurred when a decoder is forced to extract probabilistic content that is not actually encoded by the population responses. Information gap for likelihood coding hypothesis∆ info L Given discretized sensory observations x∈ {xi}, a task design specified by(p(c), pc(θ))∀c∈ {A, B}, and a generative modelp(xi|θ), the expected difference in cross-entropy loss between optimal likelihood and posterior decoders, or the information gap∆ info L for a likelihood-coding populationr L ∼p(x|θ), is derived as (see Appendix A.1 for full derivation): q∗ P,i(θ) = [p(c=A)p A(θ) +p(c=B)p B(θ)]·p(x i|θ)P θ′{[p(c=A)p A(θ′) +p(c=B)p B(θ′)]·p(x i|θ′)} (2) Since likelihood-coding populationsr L contain no prior information, an optimal posterior decoder trained on such population cannot perfectly decode the posterior distribution. Let us first defineS A j :=p(c=A) P θ pA(θ)p(xj|θ)andS B k :=p(c= B) P θ pB(θ)p(xk|θ). Then the context frequenciesρ A j andρ B k are given by: We then demonstrate how maximizing the information gap enables targeted experimental designs that optimally differentiate the two probabilistic coding hypotheses. In this paradigm, subjects perform an orientation discrimination task with two contextsc∈ {A, B}, with the context for each session sampled randomly, i.e.p(c=A) =p(c=B) = 0.5. Likelihood-coding population’s mean firing ratesr L are encoded through Gaussian tuning curves based on the sampled sensory observationsx, while posterior- coding population’s mean firing ratesr P are additionally modulated by the context-specific prior pc(θ), effectively encoding the posteriorp c(θ|x)∝p(x|θ)·p c(θ). In both cases, spike counts were then generated by sampling from Poisson distribution with the given mean firing rate. 2C, deep neural networks are trained with cross-entropy loss to serve as flexible, powerful decoders of probabilistic distributions, decod- ing either the likelihood function or the posterior from the simulated neural population responses (Walker et al., 2020). 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Scaling and convergenceWe first examine the scaling and convergence properties of the theo- retical prediction of information gap (see additional analyses and ablation studies in A.6 and A.7). For a given set of task param- eters, decoder performance differences for both simulated populations—likelihood-coding (blue) and posterior-coding (orange) populations—rapidly converge to the theoretically derived informa- tion gap (dashed lines) computed via Eq. Across different levels of stimulus con- trast, at least ten different sets of task parameters are selected to compute the theoretical value of information gap and to simulate likelihood and posterior encoding populations. We first observe that the information gap landscape depends on the stimulus contrast level, suggesting that experimental design should be tailored to specific stimulus features such as contrast. Finally, almost no overlap exists between areas where∆ info for each co