REAL METHOD of "Contextual and Seasonal LSTMs for Time Series Anomaly Detection" (arXiv 2602.09690v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address these challenges, we propose a novel prediction-based framework named Contextual and Seasonal LSTMs (CS- LSTMs). CS-LSTMs are built upon a noise decomposition strategy and jointly leverage contextual dependencies and seasonal patterns, thereby strengthening the detection of subtle anomalies. Extensive evaluations on public bench- mark datasets demonstrate that CS-LSTMs consistently outperform state-of-the- art methods, highlighting their effectiveness and practical value in robust time series anomaly detection. Unsupervised approaches, such as reconstruction-based and prediction-based methods, have become the dominant paradigm. These methods also treat time windows independently, ignoring temporal dependencies. Prediction-based method (Zhou et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021; Kingma et al., 2013) shows strong results inmultivariate time series (MTS)using Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) or LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) to model complex dependencies. However, inUTS, each timestamp contains only one value, which restricts the representation of temporal context and results in suboptimal performance of these methods onUTStasks. To examine the limitations of existing anomaly detection methods inUTStasks, we conduct a re-evaluation of several state-of-the-art approaches, including FCV AE (Wang et al., 2024), KAN- AD (Zhou et al., 2024), and TFAD (Zhang et al., 2022a). Previous methods focusing on adjacent historical periodicity neglect this evolution. Meanwhile, the lack of ground-truth labels for anomaly positions prevents the model from computing reliable prediction losses during training, further com- plicating the learning process. To address these challenges, we propose CS-LSTMs, a novel prediction-based framework. CS- LSTMs are built upon anoise decomposition strategyto mitigate the impact of anomalies, and leverage both the local trends and the evolution of periodic patterns to predict the expected nor- mal values at future time steps, and they detect anomalies via discrepancies between prediction and observation. • We analyze hard-to-detect anomalies inUTSand identify their root cause as the inability of existing methods to integrate local trends with periodic variations effectively. • We introduce a noise decomposition strategy to better capture normal patterns by eliminat- ing the non-stationarity of time series effectively, thereby improving predictive accuracy and anomaly detection robustness. Existing approaches can be divided into traditional and deep learning methods, and further categorized into supervised and unsupervised depending on label availability. Traditional methods (Lu & Ghorbani, 2008; Mahimkar et al., 2011; Rasheed et al., 2009; Rosner, 1983; Bailey, 1993; Vallis et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2005; Guan et al., 2016; Lane et al., 1997; Peterson, 2009; Muthukrishnan et al., 2004) are computationally efficient and interpretable, making them suitable when data is scarce or temporal structures are clear. They include similarity-based approaches (e.g., kNN (Peterson, 2009)), window-based approaches using subsequence matching or HMMs (Gao et al., 2002), decomposition-based approaches (e.g., STL (Cleveland et al., 1990)), deviation-based methods such as SPOT (Vallis et al., 2014) based on Extreme Value Theory, and frequency-domain methods like FFT (Rasheed et al., 2009). Deep learning approaches (Yang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023b; Shen et al., 2020; Zong et al., 2018) have attracted increasing attention due to their strong representation learning capabilities and ability to capture complex temporal dependencies. Supervised methods (Laptev et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2015; Ren et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2023b) achieve high accuracy with sufficient labels, of- ten leveraging CNNs, random forests, or pseudo-labeling strategies. Unsupervised methods (Chen et al., 2019; Kieu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2018; 2022b; Zhao et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2024) are more common in practice, typically classified into reconstruction-based and prediction-based. Reconstruction-based approaches (e.g., FCV AE, Donut (Wang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2018)) detect anomalies through reconstruction losses, while prediction-based methods forecast future values and flag deviations. Representative prediction models include LSTMAD and recent Transformer-based methods such as Informer (Zhou et al., 2021), Autoformer (Wu et al., 2021), and Fedformer (Zhou et al., 2022). More advanced architectures like Anomaly-Transformer (Xu et al., 2021) employ minimax strategies to enhance robustness, while TimesNet (Wu et al., 2022) integrates frequency-domain modeling for multi-scale and periodic signals. , xt], the objective ofUTSanomaly detection is to utilize the data[x 0, x1, . 3.2 LSTMANDCOVARIATE In our method, the LSTM is utilized to learn both the periodic trends and local variations of the time series data, while the value range information is incorporated as a covariate to assist in prediction. 4.1 NETWORKARCHITECTURE Our proposedCS-LSTMsmodel is demonstrated in Figure 5. the first branch is the seasonal prediction branch, which predicts future points by learning the peri- odicity of historical sequences; and the second branch is the local prediction branch, which predicts future points by learning the changing trends and distributions in the short term. 4.2 LOSSFUNCTION We adopt a noise-decomposedNegative Log-Likelihood (NLL)loss function to perform anomaly detection by modeling the probabilistic distribution of normal points. To address this, we design a loss function with three core components: During loss calculation, we leverage anomaly masks and noise decomposition results to obtain the reference value for each point under normal conditions. Their respective losses,Ls andL c, are computed based on the discrepancy between predicted values and actual future points, respectively. The left side reports results when trained on Yahoo and tested on KPI, WSD, and NAB; the right side shows results when trained on KPI and tested on Yahoo, WSD, and NAB.F1denotes the best F1 score,Pdenotes Precision, andRdenotes Recall. 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 5.3 TRANSFERABILITYEXPERIMENTS In industrial scenarios, retrainingTSADmodels for each new domain is costly and often restricted by privacy concerns, making cross-domain transferability essential. 5.4.1 KEYCOMPONENTS We conducted ablation studies on different components of CS-LSTMs, including the co-branch architecture, covari