REAL METHOD of "Why Keep Your Doubts to Yourself? Trading Visual Uncertainties in Multi-Agent Bandit Systems" (arXiv 2601.18735v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Existing paradigms, such as Mixture-of-Agents and knowledge-based routers, rely on heuristic proxies that ignore costs and collapse uncer- tainty structure, leading to provably suboptimal coordination. We introduce Agora, a framework that reframes coordination as a decentralized market for uncertainty. Paradigms like Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) (Guo et al., 2024) or knowledge-based routers (e.g., KABB) (Zhang et al., 2025) attempt to bypass the complexity of true optimization by relying on simplistic proxies for value, such as consensus or semantic similarity. Our methodology, detailed in Section 3, provides a constructive, non-agnostic solution. We first es- tablish amulti-dimensional uncertainty quan- tification model, creating a structured asset that makes the system structure-aware. Second, we introduce aprofitability-driven trading protocol that enforces economic rationality, making the sys- tem cost-aware. 2.1 THEECONOMICOBJECTIVE OFMULTI-AGENTCOORDINATION 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Final Epistemic Uncertainty (Ufinal_epis) 0 2 4 6 8 10Density (0.17, 10.05) (0.21, 5.75) Comparison of Uncertainty Distributions Agora Mean: To ground our analysis, we first establish the ideal of economic rationality that any advanced MAS should pursue.Setup. For a centralized ta- ble and detailed definitions of all core variables and functions, please refer to Appendix L.Objective.The system’s goal is to learn an allocation policyπthat performs principled economic optimization. 1 because they do not perform true optimization, but in- stead rely on heuristic proxies fundamentally misaligned with the economic objective. An aggregator seeking consensus will then amplify this shared error.2. Any coordination mechanismMthat is agnostic (per Definition 1) is not guaranteed to solve the objective in Eq. THEAGORAMARKETFRAMEWORK To address the theoretical deficiencies of agnostic coordination identified in Section 2, we introduce Agora: Our methodology provides a constructive, non-agnostic solution to the optimization problem in Eq. To counter theUncertainty-Structure-Agnosticismfrom Theorem 1, our first step is to “mint the currency” by formalizing cognitive uncertainty as a structured, quantifiable portfolio. Each admissible trade represents a greedy step that descends the cost landscape of the global objective function in Eq. THEBROKER AND THEAGORAALGORITHM The market is set in motion by an intelligentBroker, an extension of Thompson Sampling (TS) that finds an economically sound starting point for the decentralized optimization. The entire process is operationalized by theAgora Algorithm, presented in Algorithm 1. A Distributed Economic Optimization Algorithm 1:Input:Agent setA, costsc, expertiseΞ, initial uncertaintyu initial, Broker MAB. Iterative Greedy Cost Descent via Trading Protocol 7:best trade←FindMostProfitableTrade(Π,A,c,Ξ) 8:ifbest trade̸=nullthen 9:Let(i, j, k,amt)be the components of best trade 10:▷Execute trade based on the protocol from Eq. The agent pool consists of five representative VLMs:qwen2.5vl-72b-instruct,gemini-2.0-flash, qwen2.5vl-7b-instruct,gemma-3-27b, andgpt-4o-mini. (1) comprehensive visual understanding across benchmarks; (2) the role of our MAB strategy in uncertainty trading; (3) comparison with alternative routing and MAS strategies; (4) cost–performance trade-offs acrossN; (5) module/strategy ablations. All models, including baselines and SOTA comparators, are accessed via the OpenRouter API. It achieves new SOTA on MMBench V11 Test, InfoVQA, and CC-OCR, owing to its architecture that explicitly man- ages and trades uncertainties among heterogeneous agents. While the RL agents demonstrate learning capabilities, they struggle to match the efficiency of our method within this economic coordination task, consistently yielding lower scores and higher final epistemic uncertainty (U final epis). First, the remarkable efficiency of theN= 1case is not merely about using a cheap model; it highlights the intelligence of our market- aware broker, which selects the most suitable con- 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 figuration for a given task, avoiding unnecessary costs. Unlike heuristic methods such as Mixture-of-Agents or knowledge-based routers, which collapse uncertainty and ignore costs, Agora casts epistemic uncertainty as a structured, tradable asset across per- ceptual, semantic, and inferential dimensions. Pseudocode, algorithmic steps, and theoretical proofs are included to enable faithful reproduction of both the methodology and results. bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. Importance weight assigned to semantic typei, typicallyw i ≥0and P wi = 1 (or other normalization methods).C i(R): These weights typically satisfyw k ≥0and P wk = 1(or other normalization methods), reflecting the relative importance of different uncertainty dimensions in a specific task or system objective. Understanding the framework’s sensitivity to these factors is essential for tailoring deployments to specific operational constraints and performance objectives, thereby maximizing resource utilization and system effectiveness. E FLOPSCOMPARISON ANDCOMPUTATIONALEFFICIENCY To validate the computational efficiency of the Agora architecture, we designed a simulation-based FLOPs comparison experiment. Tasks are first attempted by the Small Agent; if it fails (or a similar heuristic applies), the task is escalated to the Medium Agent, and then to the Large Agent if necessary. Learning rate = 1e-4, discountγ RL = 0.99,ϵ DQN from 1.0 to 0.01 over 10,000 steps, target update every 1,000 steps, replay buffer size = 10,000. Employs a fine-tuned BERT (12 layers), trained for 5 epochs with learning rate 2e-5. CoT steps encourage step-by-step analysis, reducing errors in complex visual tasks. You are familiar with various problem-solving methods such as root cause analysis, decision matrices, and scenario evaluation, and adapt your approach based on the unique context of each task. - Formulate logical steps to address the question (e.g., “If the red ball is heavier, then. - Cite visual or textual evidence for each step (e.g., “The text states ‘the red ball is heavier,’ supporting this inference”). By enforcing step-by-step logic and error-checking, this prompt excels in inference tasks, min- imizing inconsistencies. For each attribute, cite specific visual evidence (e.g., “The object’s glossy finish reflects light, indicating a smooth text