REAL METHOD of "In-The-Flow Agentic System Optimization for Effective Planning and Tool Use" (arXiv 2510.05592v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Agentic systems offer a promising alternative by decomposing work across specialized modules, yet most remain training-free or rely on offline training de- coupled from the live dynamics of multi-turn interaction. We introduce AGENT- FLOW, a trainable,in-the-flowagentic framework that coordinates four modules (planner, executor, verifier, generator) through an evolving memory and directly optimizes its planner inside the multi-turn loop. To train on-policy in live environ- ments, we proposeFlow-based Group Refined Policy Optimization(Flow-GRPO), which tackles long-horizon, sparse-reward credit assignment by converting multi- turn optimization into a sequence of tractable single-turn policy updates. However, these methods still train asingle, monolithic policy under multi-turn full-context reasoning, which introduces scaling challenges: (i)trainingbecomes increasingly unstable as horizons lengthen, tool diversity grows, and environments shift with tool feedback (Wang et al., 2025c; Mai et al., 2025; Moonshot AI, 2025; Xue et al., 2025); and (ii)inference-time generalization remains brittle to unseen tasks or tools (Dong et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025b). They consist of multiple modules—often distinct LLMs with prescribed roles (e.g., planner, critic) or specialized components with dedicated tools and capabilities (e.g., executor, coder)—that coordinate via shared memory and inter-module communication. How- ever, achieving robust coordination in such systems ultimately requirestraining, since handcrafted logic or static prompting cannot reliably capture when and how modules should collaborate, adapt to evolving tool outputs, or recover from early mistakes. To address the central challenge of learning long-horizon reasoning with sparse rewards in tool- integrated agentic systems, we introduce AGENTFLOW, atrainableframework for effective plan- ning and tool use (Figure 2). To train the planner on-policy within this agentic system, we need to overcome the long-horizon credit assignment problem inherent to sparse, trajectory-level rewards. We introduceFlow-based Group Refined Policy Optimization(Flow-GRPO, Figure 4), an on-policy algorithm designed for this setting. Instead of attempting to assign credit with brit- tle, intermediate heuristics, we assign a single, verifiable final-outcome reward to the entire trajec- tory andbroadcastit to every turn. This approach, coupled with group-normalized advantages to stabilize training, enables robust credit assignment and allows the planner to learn effective long-horizon strategies from sparse feedback. [Execution Analysis] [Memory Analysis] [Verification Status] Planner VerifierExecutor (b) In-the-Flow Rollout at Turn t Trained Frozen 𝜋𝜃 Memory Memory Figure 2:(a)Overview of AGENTFLOW, a trainable agentic system for in-the-flow planning and tool use. Four modules (planner, executor, verifier, generator) coordinate via a shared evolving memory Mand toolsetK, given a queryq. Moreover, our training approach proves highly efficient, leading to increased rewards and condensed responses compared to traditional tool-integrated RL methods (§4.6). (2) We introduceFlow-GRPO, an on-policy, outcome-driven algorithm that hatcon- vertsmulti-turn RL into a sequence of tractablesingle-turnpolicy updates bybroadcastinga sin- gle, verifiable final-outcome reward to every turn. Algorithms like Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) implement this by sampling groups of responses, normalizing advantages by their re- wards, and updating the policy with a clipped objective to encourage high-reward outputs. The policy modelπ θ is then trained to maximize a final outcome reward. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 (a) Tool-Integrated Reasoning Models (LLM Agents) (b) Training-Free Agentic Systems LLM Query Answer o Module 1 Module 2 Answer o Module 3 Query Module 1 Module 2 Module N Answer o Query ... <think> </think> <tool_call> </tool_call> <answer> </answer > Trained Frozen token LLM Query Answer o <think> </think> <tool_call> </tool_call> <answer> </answer > <tools> </tools> Figure 3:Comparison of two paradigms of LLMs with tool use.(a) Monolithic tool-integrated reasoning models train a single policy to interleave reasoning (e.g.,<think>) and tool calls (e.g., <tool call>) within a single, full-context trajectory. By decomposing tasks and assigning subproblems to modules with dedi- cated tools and capabilities (e.g., planner, coder, critic), they can address complex problems such as web browsing, document processing, and multi-stage programming that exceed the scope of a sin- gle model. modules remain frozen pre-trained models orchestrated by handcrafted logic or prompting heuristics. We present AGENTFLOW, a flexible and trainable agentic system that integrates four specialized modules with an evolving memory (§3.1). At turnt, the plannerP(a trainable policyπ θ) formulates a sub-goal, selects an appropriate toolk∈K, and retrieves relevant context from memory, producing an action:a t ∼π θ(at |q, K, Mt). 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Multi-turn Group Computation Frozen Models Trained Models Reward Model Multi-turn Agentic System Rollouts Policy Model Reference Model Flow-GRPO Figure 4:Optimization for our proposed agentic system AGENTFLOW.Given a queryq, an evolving memoryM, and a toolsetK, the policy model generates actions that target sub-goals and select tools. This exposes the multi-turn credit-assignment problem directly and trains the planner on the exact states it will face at inference. Policy optimization objective.The planner policyπ θ is trained to maximize the expected return over on-policy rollouts. For each query-label pair from training corpus(q, y ∗)∼ D, we sample a group ofGon- policy trajectories{τ i}G i=1 by running the current behavior policyπ θold inside AGENTFLOW, where τi ={a 1 i , ....aTi i , oi}. both search-enhanced, including Iter-RetGen, Search-R1, ZeroSearch, ReSearch, StepSearch, and VerlTool, and code-enhanced, including TIR and ToRL; (5)Training-free agentic system: 4.3 TRAININGSTRATEGIES ON THEPLANNER We conduct an ablation study to analyze the impact of different training strategies for theAction Plannermodule in AGENTFLOW, with results reported in Table 3. In contrast, training the planner with our on-policy Flow-GRPO method proves highly effective: The planner ex- hibits adaptive efficiency, stronger self-correction, and spontaneous new integration of tools through- out step-