REAL METHOD of "Sat3DGen: Comprehensive Street-Level 3D Scene Generation from Single Satellite Image" (arXiv 2605.14984v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce Sat3DGen to address these funda- mental challenges, which embodies a geometry-first methodology. This methodol- ogy enhances the feed-forward paradigm by integrating novel geometric constraints with a perspective-view training strategy, explicitly countering the primary sources of geometric error. For validation, we first constructed a new benchmark by pairing the VIGOR-OOD test set with high-resolution DSM data. On this bench- mark, our method improves geometric RMSE from 6.76m to 5.20m. Crucially, this geometric leap also boosts photorealism, reducing the Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) from ∼40 to 19 against the leading method, Sat2Density++, despite using no extra tailored image-quality modules. Existing methods for generating 3D from a single satellite image fall into two categories:3D geometry colorization(Hua et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024b) and3D proxy for image rendering(Qian et al., 2023; 2026).3D geometry colorizationfollows a two-stage pipeline to predict and then texture 3D building geometry. While producing clean building models, these methods fail to capture non-building elements (e.g., zebra crossings, trees), resulting in outputs weakly consistent with the input satellite image (Fig. Semantic Map to 3D Comparison of single satellite input to 3D scene methods Surround-view multi-cameraand panorama video gen. Given an input satellite image, (a) Sat2Scene and (b) Sat2City generate only shells of buildings and roads and miss non-building semantics; (c) Sat2Density++ and (d) Ours are faithful to satellite semantics and appearance, but Sat2Density++ is heavily distorted, whereas our Sat3DGen yields a more structured, higher-quality 3D representation. To solve these specific problems, we propose Sat3DGen, which embodies a holistic, geometry-first methodology. To enforce plausible vertical structures and suppress floating artifacts, we introduce a Gravity-based Density V ariation Loss. Furthermore, to mitigate the issue of sparse supervision, we employPerspective View Training, jointly training on panoramas and their projected views to increase effective viewpoint coverage and photometric consistency. We first validate our geometric improvements against the leading method, Sat2Density++, on a new benchmark we constructed by pairing the VIGOR-OOD test set with 1-meter resolution DSM data. A frozen DINO-v3 encoder (Sim´eoni et al., 2025) maps Isat to a compact token grid, which is optionally padded with learnable spatial capacity at the periphery and then decoded into a high-resolution tri-plane feature field. Satellite Encoder and Tokenization.Following exsiting object-level feedforward image to 3D works, we use frozen pretrained VIT model as image encoder (Xu et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2025). 3.3 VOLUMETRICRENDERING ANDOUTPUTS Ray Marching and Compositing.For a camera ray r(t) =o+td , t∈[t n, tf ], we sample points {xk} with step δk and compute transmittance Tk = exp  − P j<k σ(xj)δ j  . LRGB = X i ˆIi −I gt i 2 2 +λ lpips X i LLPIPS  ˆIi, Igt i  +λ GAN X i LGAN( ˆIi),(11) where LLPIPS is the perceptual loss and LGAN follows the StyleGAN2 hinge objective (Karras et al., 2020) for realism. The full training objective is a weighted sum of the above terms: The training process is conducted on 8 NVIDIA H20 GPUs with a batch size of 32, comprising 600,000 iterations for the training phase. We also provide results from afeed-forward image-to-3Dmodel (denoted as “Canonical Image-to-3D” in Table 1), which removes the proposed spatial token module, gravity-based density variation loss, perspective training strategy,Lgrav, and Ldepth proposed in our method. In contrast, our approach trains on three cities and conducts out-of-domain testing on an additional city, Seattle. As shown in Table 1, our method leads in FID, KID, and DINO. “Base (Full model w/o perspective training)” enables Ldep, Lgrav, and Spatial Tokens but omits perspective training. This underscores the superior capability of our method in generating geometrically precise urban scenes. 5 CONCLUSION In this work, we introduce Sat3DGen, a novel algorithm for generating a 3D outdoor scene from a satellite image. Our algorithm is trained exclusively on GPS-aligned satellite and panorama street view image data. while our method advances urban-scale 3D scene reconstruction for beneficial applications such as autonomous driving simulation, AR/VR urban planning, and geographic visualization, it could also be applied to large-scale surveillance if deployed irresponsibly. All implementation is based on standard deep learning frameworks (PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)), and our model architecture, training strategies, and evaluation protocols are fully described in Sec. This enables other researchers to reproduce our quantitative scores and qualitative visualizations, and to extend our method to new geographic regions or related cross-view generation tasks. From the presented videos, it is clear that our method, by producing enhanced 3D assets, achieves superior panorama video generation—yielding more regular building shapes, fewer floating artifacts, and improved generation of ground vehicles, road signs, and trees. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the first to generate diverse content in multi-view perspective videos from a single satellite image without requiring video data or 3D geometry as training input. We first download an extensive satellite image from online platforms and then resize it to ensure the per-pixel resolution remains consistent with the pixel resolution of our training data. The transitions between buildings show minimal discontinuities, highlighting the effectiveness of our method and its strong potential for large-scale 3D content generation. 11, given a colored semantic map, the diffusion model first generates a satellite map, followed by Sat3DGen generating 3D assets based on the satellite image input. Other Hyperparameters.In our reconstruction of the panorama and satellite view perspectives, as well as in the sections of GAN loss and opacity loss, we maintain the same weight settings as Sat2Density++. For the newly introducedGravity-based Density V ariation Loss, we assign a weight of 3.5. Regarding the perspective view image reconstruction loss, we assign a weight that is half of the panorama view reconstruction loss. Conversely, the weight for the perspective view GAN loss is kept consistent with the panorama view GAN loss weight. Given a colored semantic map, our mo