REAL METHOD of "t-SNE Exaggerates Clusters, Provably" (arXiv 2510.07746v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 T-SNEEXAGGERATES CLUSTERS,PROVABLY Noah Bergam†, Szymon Snoeck*, & Nakul Verma† †Computer Science Department; *Applied Mathematics Department Columbia University {noah.bergam,sgs2179}@columbia.edu, verma@cs.columbia.edu ABSTRACT Central to the widespread use of t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) is the conviction that it produces visualizations whose structure roughly matches that of the input. 1 INTRODUCTION t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) and related data visualization methods have become sta- ples in modern exploratory data analysis. While there has been some work investigating the shortcomings of t-SNE in various practical settings (see Section 2.2 for a detailed discussion of the relevant literature), to the best of our knowledge this is the first work which theoretically analyzes some of the key limitations of t-SNE. 2 RELATEDWORK Confidence in the data visualizations produced by t-SNE and related methods is a contentious subject in data science (Marx, 2024; de Bodt et al., 2025). Some argue that these methods have merit in terms of preserving cluster structure and therefore aid in exploratory data analysis, while others warn us about the distortions introduced by these methods. 2.1 PERFORMANCEGUARANTEES ANDANALYSIS OF T-SNE Shaham & Steinerberger (2017) were among the first to provide a guarantee on the visualization pro- duced by optimal SNE embeddings of well-clustered data. Along with these algorithmic performance guarantee results, there is a line of work that seeks to establish a more fundamental understanding of t-SNE as an optimization problem. (2012) were among the first to investigate the potential shortcomings of using KL- divergence in a t-SNE visualization and proposed a generalization to other divergences that may be better suited for specific datasets and user needs. t-SNE accomplishes this by assigning affinities to input data points which encode how likely an input point is to be a neighbor to a given point. The goal then is to find a configuration of the embedded pointsYthat induces a similar neighborhood affinity. t-SNE constructsP by first computing neighborhood affinities for each pointidefined as (for anyi̸=j) Pj|i(X;σ i) := exp(−∥xj −x i∥2/(2σ2 i ))P k̸=i exp(−∥xk −x i∥2/(2σ2 i )) Pi|i(X;σ i) := 0(1) whereσ i ≥0encodes the (point-dependent) neighborhood scaling 2. The matrixPis then constructed based on a crucial parameter called the perplexity (denoted asρand taking values in[1, n−1]), as follows: (1) For eachi∈[n], select the (unique, see Lemma 14) neighborhood scaleσ ∗ i that minimizes the gap between the entropy ofP ·|i(X;σ ∗ i )andlog 2 ρ. To avoid the so-calledcrowding problem(see Van der Maaten & Hinton (2008) for details), the output affinity matrixQis computed based on a t-distribution. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 As indicated before, the objective then is to minimize the gap between the input and output affinities PandQ. This highly non-convex objective is usually optimized by initializing at a good starting point via an early exaggeration phase, followed by performing standard gradient descent methods and returning an embeddingYthat corresponds to a local minimum of the objective. Definition 1.For ann-point dataset 3 X⊂R n−1 and perplexity parameterρ∈[1, n−1], define t-SNEρ(X) :={Y⊂R d :∇ Y LX (Y) = 0} as the set of outputsY⊂R d that are stationary to the t-SNE objective on a given inputX. Further- more, for a set ofn-point datasetsX n, we define: when does a clustered output imply a clustered input? More generally, what information can be deduced about the input given a visualization? We begin to answer this question by proving that the strength of cluster separation in the input cannot be reliably inferred from the low-dimensional visualization. Definition 2.Given a partitionC 1 ⊔C 2 ⊔ · · · ⊔Ck = [n]ofnpoints{x 1, . Note that if|C (i)|= 1, thenS(i)is defined to be zero. Theaverage silhouette scorethen is simply the average across all points inX: 3Without loss of generality, we shall assume that the input dimensionD=n−1. The corresponding dendrograms (right column, produced using the Ward’s method) further elucidate the relative strength of pairwise distances. 4See Algorithm 1 for a formalization of this process. t-SNE, as ex- pected, reveals the two underlying clusters (see Figure 4, first panel). In the limiting case, whenρ= 1,allaffinity is assigned to the poison point. Therefore the poison point attack can make itimpossibleto distinguish between a well-clustered and a completely un-clustered input based on their t-SNE loss landscapes (this is experimentally corroborated in Figure 11). The original dataset, visualized in panels 1 and 3, consists of400points sampled from a mixture of two Gaussians inR 2000. The poison point is then placed at the mean of the previously sampled points; the resulting401point dataset is visualized in panels 2 and 4. It is natural to hope that data visualization methods can enable the identification of outliers. This phenomenon has been observed empirically in prior work, though to our knowledge we are the first to formalize it (Schubert & Gertz, 2017). An analysis of the t-SNE algorithm for data visual- ization.Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. A dendrite method for cluster analysis.Communications in Statistics, 3 (1):1–27, 1974. ForceAtlas2, a continuous graph layout algorithm for handy network visualization designed for the Gephi soft- ware.PloS One, 9(6):e98679, 2014. Connection graph laplacian methods can be made robust to noise.The Annals of Statistics, 2015. Shift-invariant similarities circumvent distance concentration in stochastic neighbor embedding and variants.Procedia Computer Science, 2011. Two key properties of dimensionality reduction methods.Com- putational Intelligence and Data Mining (CIDM), 2014. A Robustly Optimized BERT Pre- training Approach.Computing Research Repository (CoRR), abs/1907.11692, 2019. Seeing data as t-SNE and UMAP do.Nature Methods, 21(6):930–933, 2024. Uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction.Computer Research Repository (CoRR), abs/1802.03426, 2018. Compressibility barriers to neighborhood- preserving data visualizations.Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), 2026. Information retrieval perspective to nonlinear dimensionality reduction for data visualization.Journal of Ma- chine Learning Research (JMLR), 11(2), 2010. In light of the results of Sect