REAL METHOD of "Understanding the Implicit Biases of Design Choices for Time Series Foundation Models" (arXiv 2510.19236v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Rather than developing a new model and claiming that it is better than existing TSFMs, e.g., by winning on existing well-established benchmarks, our objective is to understand how the various “knobs” of the training process affect model quality. A common workflow is to adjust these knobs based on intuitions about the model and then use available data, typically in the form of curated, well- established benchmarks, to train and evaluate the model. A model trained against an -based loss regresses to the mean when uncertain. Unfortunately, model improvements often do not stand the test of time—when the data and compute aremuchlarger, or when the data arequalitativelydifferent than the well-established benchmarks on which the model was trained, the same knob fiddling can have a different, and often deleterious, effect. a continuous embedding naturally tends to preserve geometric relationships; while a quantization-based embedding introduces a continuous-to-discrete “unrounding noise,” and then relies on training to (imperfectly) recover continuous information in the hidden space. A cross-entropy loss, e.g., in Chronos, computes forecasts as a discrete classification task, and is more aligned with LLMs. A continuous regression- based loss is more aligned with classical statistical methods: theL 2-based mean squared loss is a popular choice for models that perform point forecasting, e.g., TimesFM, whereas models that predict quantiles are usually trained on anL 1-based quantile loss or negative log-likelihood loss, e.g., Chronos-Bolt. TSFMs that use a regression-based loss tend to regress to either the mean or median forecast, while TSFMs that use a cross-entropy loss tend to regress much less aggressively and thus, for instance, have the flexibility to hop between basins for chaotic data and to better learn quasi-periodic information. it tokenizes time series values using scaling and quantization into a fixed vocabulary, and then it trains ex- isting transformer-based language model architectures on these tokenized time series via a cross- entropy loss, rather than using a continuous embedding and regression-based loss. Chronos-Bolt replaced quantization with a continuous embedding to preserve distances better, and the discrete cross-entropy loss with theL 1-based quantile loss, which has been commonly used in probabilistic forecasting methods, e.g., MQ-(R)CNN/Transformer (Wen et al., 2018; Park et al., 2022; Eisenach et al., 2022). If one varies model and data together, then one might hope to observe some sort of neural scaling, where improvement continues across scales of model and data and compute, without saturating. Our work highlights challenges with learning this “bitter lesson”:design principles for developing machine learning systems that are forward- compatible with absorbing qualitatively more/different data and compute in a graceful way are not as well understood as the design principles for developing models that work with data and compute of a given size and scale. Attention Scores of Each Patch Figure 2:In (a), we show the forecasts of a signal consisting of a low-frequency and a high- frequency mode using two pretrained Chronos-Bolt models with patch sizek= 1 andk= 16, respectively. Given a sampled sequence from a time series with periodic patterns, if the sequence’s re- curring motifs do not align with the chosen patch size, then the patching process can introduce 6 aliasing effects. TSFMs that rely on the encoder-only, encoder–decoder, and decoder-only architectures dif- fer in how well they preserve peri- odic structures present in the con- text. The cross-attention scores are aggregated across all layers when generating the first prediction token. This bias affects both self-attention and cross- attention in a Transformer. In Figure 4b, the self-attention scores of Chronos are bimodal, i.e., tokens place high attention weights on their immediate neighbors, and low attention weights on distant tokens. Most TSFMs are trained with either anL 2-based loss (e.g., mean-squared loss) or anL 1-based loss (e.g., quantile loss). A notable exception is Chronos, which is trained with a cross-entropy loss, like LLMs. Since the process is fully deterministic, Chronos (cross-entropy loss), Chronos-Bolt (L 1 loss), and TimesFM (L 2 loss) produce similar forecasts. Aspincreases — i.e., the context becomes more uncertain — models trained with a continuous loss regress more strongly than the one trained with cross-entropy. Summary of the Regression-to-the-Mean Bias:Models trained withL 2- orL 1-based losses tend to collapse future variability into a central forecast, reflecting mean or median behavior and usually resulting in a good pointwise fitting. Several approaches have since been proposed to tune the strength of this bias, including Sobolev-norm-based training strate- gies (Vlassis & Sun, 2021; Yu et al., 2023b; Tsay, 2021; Son et al., 2021; Czarnecki et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2021; Son, 2023; Liu et al., 2024a) and frequency-aware initialization methods (Yu et al., 2023a, 2025a). Then, we provide more results on the attention matrices in a Transformer with patching to corroborate the frequency bias (Section C.1.2). In the first step, we lower-bound the Frobenius norm of Φ(U). •Step I:Since the ReLU activation function is homogeneous on [0,∞), we may assume, without loss of generality, thatα=β= 1. When these two equations hold, we have by the sub-multiplicativity of the spectral norm that ∥Φ(U)∥2 =∥W 2R∥2 ≤ ∥W2∥2∥R∥2 =O(1)( √ dm+m) =O(1) √ dm,(16) where the second last step comes from the fact thatn < mand the last step follows from the fact thatd/m= Θ(1). •In the first statement, why do we assume that∥Φ(V)∥= Ω(1)∥W 2∥2∥W1∥2∥V∥2? If we assume no ReLU activation is used, then this condition simply reduces to the general tightness of the sub-multiplicativity of the spectral norm. if we sample a number of patches from the same narrow frequency band, then they are embedded into a small subspace; while if we sample the patches with different frequency contents, then they are embedded into different subspaces of the hidden space. •In the first statement, why do we assume that∥b1 ⊤ n ∥F =O(1)∥W 2ReLU(W1V)∥F ? This assumption simply says that when computing the output of a two-layer ReLU- activated MLP, we are not asymptotically dominated by the bias term, which is a natural one to make. 27 Numerical Experiment 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16101 102 103 100 101 102 stable rank Figure 11:Theε-ran