REAL METHOD of "Memorization Through the Lens of Sample Gradients" (arXiv 2404.15146v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Zico Kolter Carnegie Mellon University Abstract Large language models (LLMs) trained on web-scale datasets raise substantial concerns regarding permissible data usage. One major question is whether these models “memorize” all their training data or they integrate many data sources in some way more akin to how a human would learn and synthesize information. The answer hinges, to a large degree, on how we define memorization. In this work, we propose the Adversarial Compression Ratio (ACR) as a metric for assessing memorization in LLMs. A given string from the training data is considered memo- rized if it can be elicited by a prompt (much) shorter than the string itself—in other words, if these strings can be “compressed” with the model by computing adver- sarial prompts of fewer tokens. The ACR overcomes the limitations of existing notions of memorization by (i) offering an adversarial view of measuring memo- rization, especially for monitoring unlearning and compliance; and (ii) allowing for the flexibility to measure memorization for arbitrary strings at a reasonably low compute. We propose a compression ratio where we compare the length of the shortest prompt that elicits a training sample in response from an LLM to the length of that sample. If a string in the training data can be compressed, i.e. the minimal prompt is shorter than the sample, then we call it memorized. arXiv:2404.15146v3 [cs.LG] 11 Nov 2024 1 Introduction A central question in the discussion of large language models (LLMs) concerns the extent to which they memorize their training data versus how they generalize to new tasks and settings. they clearly memorize parts of the training data—for example, are often able to reproduce large portions of training data verbatim [Carlini et al., 2023]—but they also seem to learn from this data, allowing them to generalize to new settings. Certain formulations claim that a passage from the training data is memorized if the LLM can reproduce it exactly [Nasr et al., 2023]. Other formulations define memorization by whether or not prompting an LLM with a portion of text from the training set results in the completion of that training datum [Carlini et al., 2023]. We argue that such a definition provides an intuitive notion of memorization—if a certain phrase exists within the LLM training data (e.g., is not itself generated text) and it can be reproduced with fewer input tokens than output tokens, then the phrase must be stored somehow within the weights of the LLM. On the other hand, we find that text not in the training data of an LLM, such as samples posted on the internet after the training period, are not compressible, that is their ACR is low. What constitutes a breach of copyright remains contentious and prior work defines this on a spectrum from ‘training on a data point itself constitutes violation’ to ‘copyright violation only occurs if a model verbatim regurgitates training data’. Given a generative model M, a sample y from the training data made of a prefix yprefix and a suffix ysuffix is discoverably memorized if the prefix elicits the suffix in response, or M (yprefix) =ysuffix. Given a generative model M, a sample y from the training data is extractably memorized if an adversary, without access to the training set, can find an input prompt p that elicits y in response, or M (p) =y. Given a training algorithm A that maps a dataset D ⊂ Dto a generative model M and a measure of model performance S(M, y) on a specific sample y, the counterfactual memorization of a training example y ∈ Dis given by: mem(y) := ED⊂D,y∈D[S(A(D), y)] performance on y when trained with y − ED′⊂D,y̸∈D′[S(A(D′), y)] performance on y when not trained with y , where D and D′ are subsets of training examples sampled from D. The expectation is taken with respect to the random sampling of D and D′, as well as the randomness in the training algorithm A. Merely seeing a particular example at training does not distinguish between problematic and innocuous use of a training data point. Given a piece of text, how short is the minimal prompt that elicits that text exactly? In this section, we formally define and introduce our MINI PROMPT algorithm that we use to answer our central question. Given a generative model M, a sample y from the training data is τ-memorized if the ACR(M, y) > τ(y). A Practical Algorithm for Compressible Memorization Since the compression rate ACR is defined in terms of the solution to a minimization problem, we propose an approximate solver to estimate compression rates, see Algorithm 1. Each step of our algorithm runs GCG to optimize z for n steps. If n steps of GCG fails, or M (z(i)) ̸= y, then the next iterate z(i+1) is initialized with five more tokens than z(i). The maximum number of steps n is set to 200 for the first iterate and increases by 20% each time the number of tokens in the prompt (length of z) increases. As with the weak in-context unlearning example above where we 6 4 8 12 16 20 Unlearning Step 0.0 0.5 1.0Portion Memorized Compression Completion QA after 20 unlearning steps Question: The following experiments are done with the open source Pythia [Biderman et al., 2023] models, which are trained on The Pile [Gao et al., 2020] providing transparency around their training data. These strings are samples from the distribution of training data as the training set includes real news articles from just a few months prior. Our experiments, including those involving random strings and Associated Press data, show that while the GCG algorithm can elicit any output, we never observe compression of non-training data. This suggests that our method is robust against false positives. Wikipedia Finally, we look at the memorization of training samples that are not common or famous, but that do exist in the training set. Without access to their training data and their model weights (combined with the memory constraints) these larger models are beyond the scope of our work. Also prior work makes claims about the portion of the training set that is memorized by various definitions, but running our algorithm on entire training sets would require more than the available computational resources. B Algorithms In Our Experiments In our experiments we use GCG [Zou et al., 2023] so we provide a pseudoscope description of it here along with our MINI PROMPT algorithm. ACR Portion Memorized Pythia-1.4B Famous Quotes 1.17 0.47 Pythia-1.4B Paraphrased Quotes 0.68 0.11 F Compute In order 