REAL METHOD of "CE-Nav: Flow-Guided Reinforcement Refinement for Cross-Embodiment Local Navigation" (arXiv 2509.23203v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce CE-Nav, a novel two-stage (IL-then- RL) framework that systematically decouples universal geometric reasoning from embodiment-specific dynamic adaptation. First, we train an embodiment-agnostic General Expert offline using imitation learning. Second, for a new robot, we freeze the expert and use it as a guiding prior to train a lightweight, Dynamics-Aware Refiner via on- line reinforcement learning. Successful real-world deployments further validate our approach as an efficient and scalable solution for building generalizable navigation systems. On the other end,hierarchical methodsfirst plan a path as a series of future waypoints or a trajectory [2–6]. It decouples high- level geometric reasoning from low-level motor control, yet provides a reactive command interface that can be trained to compensate for the underlying system’s dynamics. To overcome these specific limitations, we introduceCE-Nav, a novel framework for Cross-Embodiment Local Navigation that achieves both low-cost transferability and high performance. Our approach is founded on hierarchical decoupling, separating the navigation task into a high-level velocity planning policy (π high) and a low-level locomotion controller (π low). Our framework does not assume this controller is an ideal velocity tracker; rather, our Stage 2 refiner is explicitly trained to compensate for its specific dynamic characteristics and execution imperfections. The training ofπ high follows a two-stage paradigm that disentangles embodiment-agnostic geometric reasoning from embodiment-specific dynamic adaptation. We train a general navigation expert (πexpert) that understands universal planning principles (e.g., obstacle avoidance) purely from a kinematic perspective,without relying on any real robot data. For a new robot, we freeze the general expert and train a lightweight,Dynamics- aware Refiner. This modular, plug-and-play design allows CE-Nav to endow new robotic platforms with sophisticated navigation capabilities through a brief and stable training process. • We propose a novel IL-then-RL framework that decouples universal geometric reasoning from embodiment- specific dynamics. The framework uses a multi-modal kinematic expert, trained offline on classical planner data, to guide a lightweight, dynamics-aware refiner via rapid online adaptation. • We introduce VelFlow, a conditional normalizing flow policy that learns the multi-modal distribu- tion of kinematically-sound actions. • A training strategy that achieves state-of-the-art navigation performance without any costly robot- specific data. 2 RELATED WORK 2.1 Cross-Embodiment Navigation Classical local planning methods, such as the Dynamic Window Approach (DW A) [12] and Timed Elastic Band (TEB) [13], have proven robust for local obstacle avoidance. A multi-modal, embodiment- agnostic General Expert is trained offline via imitation learning on expert data. The frozen expert is used as a guiding prior to train a Dynamics-Aware Refiner via online reinforcement learning, allowing it to adapt to a specific robot’s dynamics. End-to-end (E2E) methods [1] map observations directly to joint commands, but deeply entangle planning with dynamics, requiring massive embodiment randomiza- tion. 2.2 Modeling Multi-Modality in Robotic Learning Most deep learning methods for navigation treat the task as a deterministic regression problem [7, 10, 14]. Our work differs fundamentally by integrating a flow-based generative model (VelFlow) into a broader framework where it first captures multi-modal expertise (Stage 1), and then serves as a guiding prior for online reinforcement learning (Stage 2). This unique IL-then-RL architecture enables the policy to preserve multi-modal "common sense" while refining actions beyond the scope of the original kinematic demonstra- tions, allowing it to adapt to specific, unseen robot dynamics. 3 Methodology 3.1 Overview and Problem Formulation The Cross-Embodiment navigation task requires a mobile robot to navigate from a starting position to a goal in an unknown, cluttered environment. At each timestept, the policy executes an actiona t. The objective is to find a policyπthat minimizes travel time to the goal while ensuring safety (collision avoidance). Given a new robot with its specific locomotion policyπ low, including all its inherent response characteristics and tracking errors, our goal is to learn a safe and efficient high-level navigation policyπ high with minimal training overhead. General Knowledge and Fast Adaptation We propose a two-stage paradigm for training the high-level policyπ high (as illustrated in Fig. 3.3.2 Network Architecture State Encoder.The observationsis composed of a 2D LiDAR scan and a robot state vector. The state encoder processes the 2D LiDAR scan with a three-layer CNN and concatenates the resulting feature map with the robot state vector. This combined representation is then passed through a two-layer MLP to produce a final 256-dimensional state embedding, which serves as the conditional input to the VelFlow network. We design our VelFlow module based on the Real-NVP architecture [20], consisting of 12 coupling layers with hidden dimensions of 512. The training objective is to minimize the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the expert demonstrations. The policy outputs a final velocity commandv final, which is first predicted as a normalized vectorv norm and then scaled by predefined velocity limitsV lim. Lguide =||π refiner(sguided)−scale·v ref||2 (3) Ltotal =L PPO +λ· Lguide (4) LPPO is the standard PPO objective, driving the refiner to discover behaviors that maximize the cumulative environmental reward.L guide is an auxiliary guidance loss, wherev ref is a single velocity command sampled from the frozenf VelFlow(z;s). We employ a curriculum learning strategy by annealing its value over the course of training:Initial Phase(e.g., steps 0-1k,λ= 0.5): For each difficulty level, we pre-sample and fix 100 start-goal pairs to ensure a consistent and fair comparison across all methods. Both IL methods were trained on a new complete dataset of 10 million state-action pairs generated from Go2’s successful DW A trajectories in the Isaac platform. Furthermore, NavRL was adapted to train with the same URDF and locomotion policy as our method. Method SR↑SPL↑ DW A 0.7500 0.6832 NavRL 0.5083 0.4612 CE-Nav (Ours) 0.9167 0.8913 We conducted 40 trials for each of the three challenging scenarios: The VelFlow module effectively address