REAL METHOD of "Task Vectors, Learned Not Extracted: Performance Gains and Mechanistic Insights" (arXiv 2509.24169v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

First, we propose directly training LearnedTaskVectors (LTVs), which surpass extracted TVs in accuracy and exhibit superior flexibility—acting effectively at arbitrary layers, positions, and even with ICL prompts. In this work, we address the first shortcoming by proposing todirectly train LearnedTaskVectors (LTVs) by adding a vector to a specific layer’s hidden states and optimizing it through gradient descent (Figure 1 (A)), which finds the optimal TV un- constrained by the quality of model’s representations. At each layer, the hidden state of token i at layer l is updated as hl i =h l−1 i + ∑K k=1 al i,k +m l i, where al i,k is the output of the k-th attention head (head (l,k) ), and ml i is the MLP output. (2024),we first inject the TVs at one layer at a time, iterating over all layers of Llama3.1- 8B, and report the average performance across datasets in Figure 2. The results show that our LTV not only consistently outperforms the base- line methods at all layers, but also matches or even surpasses ICL performance—particularly when injected at early layers of both models. Specifically, we apply prefix tuning to the key and value projections of all heads at the first layer of Llama3.1-8B with prefix length 2, introducing exactly d trainable parameters. We then compare these baselines with injecting a single layer update at the last-token position of layer 0 (d parameters). Comparing LTV against PEFT methods in terms of performance and efficiency Training Inference Method Acc.↑Param Cnt.↓Mean Lat. (GB)↓ Prefix Tuning 85.67%d0.050 533.15 43.65 0.026361.51 16.31LoRA 91.63% 2d0.053 526.98 43.65 0.032 361.52 16.37LTV (Ours)92.89% d 0.049 503.87 43.56 0.024 361.52 16.36 Accuracy of late-layer injectionAnother notable trait of LTVs is that they still achieve nontrivial performance when trained and injected at late layers, despite an overall decreasing trend with depth. We set l to the middle layer of the model (i.e., 16 for the 32-layer Llama3.1-8B) as the baseline, and then consider the following variants.1)Keep l fixed but inject (and train) at a different posi- tion P={4} , i.e., add the TV to the fourth token hidden state 3.2)Inject at multiple positions: Cross-task TV similarity and generalizabilityAs a first step toward understanding how TVs capture task id- iosyncrasies, we compute cosine similarities among LTVs trained for different tasks (and across LTVs trained for the same task). For each of the seven tasks, we train a middle-layer LTV five times, yielding a total of7×5=35 LTVs, and compute pairwise cosine similarities among them. We train middle-layer LTVs for the first two tasks, sum the resulting vectors, and evaluate the composed vector as a TV on the third task. Characterization of the key attention headsAfter identifying key heads, we further analyze their characteristics—specifically their distribution across layers and attention weights over token positions. Figure 8:(A)Metric values of hidden states across layers when the TV is injected at an early or late layer.(B)Tokens decoded from TVs, with early-layer TVs yielding random tokens and late-layer TVs producing task-related tokens. HL =Layer_Update l→L(Hl),H L′ (l) =Layer_Update l→L(Hl +1 nθ⊤ l ),(6) where HL are zero-shot hidden states at the final layer L, and multiplying by 1n adds the TV to each of the n examples. See Section I for the full details of the fitting and reconstruction procedure, where we also the provide the theoretical guarantee for our method and experimental results validating the theorem. Decomposition of TV’s influence mechanismAlthough TVs injected at different layers are uni- formly transformed into final output changes via a linear map WTV,(l) , this shared linear mechanism does not eliminate meaningful layer-dependent differences, as evidenced by the contrasting behav- iors of early- and late-layer TVs in Figure 8. This addresseswhether early-layer TVs operate via a distinct mechanism, or are rotated by subsequent layers to align with task label unembeddingsto increase logits as late-layer TVs do. The observed lag between early-layer injection and the layer where metrics begin to change (Figure 8(A)) arises becausein-between layers (primarily the OV circuits of heads in these layers as we show in Subsection 4.2) are needed to rotate the TV toward task-related directions. (C) Figure 10:(A)Applying the rotation to TVs at different layers substantially increases alignment with unembeddings of task-related labels.(B)After rotation, early-layer TVs that originally decode random tokens produce task-related tokens.(C)The rotation effect diminishes for late-layer TVs as the estimated matrix approaches identity. Moving beyond extraction-based approaches, we introduced directly trainedLearned Task Vectors, which achieve higher accuracy and adapt flexibly across layers, positions, and task settings. B DETAILEDPROCEDURES OFTRAININGLEARNEDTASKVECTORS As described in the main text, we trainθ by minimizing the loss −logp(y q|xq,θ,L,P) . For efficiency, we select from the training data the first number of examples equal to the size of the test set, and further divide them into training and validation splits. For example, the Antonym dataset contains 600 training and 400 test samples; we take the first 400 training samples and split them into 240 for training and 160 for validation. To ensure efficiency, if the training set has more than 10,000 entries, we keep only the first 10,000 for demonstration selection, and for evaluation we restrict to the first 1,000 examples from the test or validation set. Concretely, we inject the extracted TVs at layers corresponding to 50% of the total number of layers of each model (for instance, at layer 16 for a 32-layer model). D.3 ABLATIONSTUDIES FOR THELAYERSTRIDEWHENINJECTINGLTVS TOMULTIPLE LAYERS In Table 2, we demonstrate the scalability of LTVs by injecting them into every four layers of the model simultaneously. In Table 15, we conduct ablation studies on the layer stride by injecting at every two layers or every eight layers. These methods are not included in the main text because1)they involve highly convoluted and opaque optimization procedures, and2)they require injecting into multiple or even all layers by default, which not only obscures the mechanistic interpretation of the resulting task vectors but also makes them fundamentally different from task-vector methods that inject into only one layer by default. As shown in Table 6, LTVs require the least a