REAL METHOD of "Reducing Symmetry Increase in Equivariant Neural Networks" (arXiv 2608.12010v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

(i) For any given feature space and input symmetry group, we prove that the increased symmetry admits an infimum determined by the structure of the feature space; (ii) Building on this foundation, we develop a computable algorithm to derive this infimum, and propose practical guidelines for feature design to pre- vent harmful symmetry increases. their expressivity can degrade, leading to a loss of information. (2021) and Kaba & Ravanbakhsh (2023) lack a rigorous mathematical description, and the solutions proposed, such as in Kaba & Ravanbakhsh (2023), often involve relaxing the equivariance constraint itself, rather than providing a solution within the equivariant framework. • In § 4, we develop a computable algorithm to derive this infimum by analyzing the orbit types. • In § 5, we demonstrate that under regularity conditions, such as the manifold hypothesis for data, our method can fully reduce symmetry increase. Specifically, formostequivariant maps or for ENNs with sufficient approximation capabilities, the output symmetry will be precisely this predictable infimum, preventing orientational information loss. This action is a map that assigns to each element g∈G a transformation ρX (g) :X→X , such that ρX (g1g2) =ρ X (g1)ρX (g2). The task of equivariant encoding is then to learn an equivariant mapf:X→Y. If the orbit type (Gx) is not present in Y (i.e., (Gx)/∈ OG(Y) ), then the equality Gx =G f(x) is impossible (otherwise, Gf(x) becomes an isotropy subgroup, implying (Gx)∈ OG(Y) , which leads to a contradiction), and the symmetry must therefore strictly increase. We define thekernelof the action ρX as the set of group elements that fix every point inX:kerρ X :={g∈G|g(x) =x,∀x∈X} Distinguishing between intentional and unintended symmetry increase is crucial. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 To characterize the behavior of symmetry increase within a representation X, we first establish a partial order to compare different symmetries. In particular, if (H)∈ OG(X H ), then (H) is the minimal orbit type within that subspace. For a map between G-sets X and Y , we define anisovariant mapas one that strictly preserves symmetry for allx∈X: To formalize this unavoidable symmetry increase, we introduce an operator pY . We begin with the foundational criterion for identifying isotropy subgroups, first established as a necessary condition by Michel (1980). We define a representation V of a group G as a high-multiplicity representation if for every non-zero isotypic component corresponding to an irreducible representation Vi, its multiplicitym(V, Vi)is greater thandimG. First, it offers a computationally convenient method in the form of a chain recursion, which only requires checking adjacent subgroups. The dimensions of the necessary fixed-point spaces can be calculated via the trace formula (Golubitsky 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1:Orbit Type Test for High- Multiplicity Representations Data:Symmetry groupG; Closed subgroupH⊂G; High-Multiplicity Rep.VofG Result:is_in((H),O G(V)). 1 Let set S={H i} ⊂Gto be all adjacent closed supergroups ofHinG; 2O ←∅; 3d H ←dimV H; 4forH i in Sdo 5d Hi ←dimV Hi; 6ifd H −d Hi = 0then 7returnFalse; 8end 9end 10returnTrue; Algorithm 2:Symmetry Infimum Cal- culation Data:Symmetry groupG; Closed subgroupH⊂G; Rep.VofG. 1ifis_in((H),O G(V))then 2return(H); 3end 4Let setS={H i}to be all closed supergroups ofHinG; 5O ←∅; 6forH i in Sdo 7ifis_in((H i),O G(V))then 8Add(H i)toO; 9end 10end 11returnmin(O); et al., 1988). Using the two algorithms described above, we have characterized all instances of symmetry increase for the closed subgroups of SO(3) or O(3) in the representations V ⊕r l=l0 and V ⊕r l=l± 0 for r >3, respectively, see § C.4. We now illustrate our algorithms with a simple example. Example 4.3.We illustrate our algorithms by calculating the orbit type and symmetry infimum for the geometric symmetry Dkh (k >2) of the k-fold from Ex. Here we provide only a sketch of the derivation, the full procedure is provided in § C.3. First, we apply the orbit type test from Algo. These properties provide a direct mechanism for controlling the symmetry increase of an equivariant feature, that is to choose components whose symmetry infimum (computed as described in § C.4 for G=SO(3) or O(3)) align with the desired behavior for task-relevant symmetries. ensuring the map is relative isovariant) since such increases can lead to the accidental loss of orientational information. Note that M(H) is a finite union of submanifolds, then f isalmost isovariant relative toYif for every orbit type(H)in the data support, the isovariance condition ρY (Gx) =ρ Y (Gf(x) ),(9) holds for all points x∈M (H) except for a subset of µM(H) -measure zero. For equivariant maps, a key generic property, closely related to almost isovariance, is that the dimension of the set of points where the orbit type is increase from(H)to(H ′)by a mapfis constrained for a generic map. Dataset.We first construct a k-fold structure lying in the xOy plane (here k= 3 ), and then apply random rotations to place it on m distinct planes (here m= 6 ), as illustrated in Fig. Embeddings.For the resulting m·res candidate structures, we compute the graph-level features via randomly initialized single-layer TFN (Thomas et al., 2018) with detailed setting in § F.1. Embeddings.We employed both TFN (Thomas et al., 2018) and HEGNN (Cen et al., 2024) to compute the norm of the embedding difference across 12 configurations for each, varying by the number of irrep channels (1, 4, 16) and layers (1-4). 6.3 MOLECULEPROPERTYPREDICTION WITHPRETRAINEDEQUIVARIANTFEATURES To illustrate the guiding significance of the theory presented in this paper for practical applications, we designed experiments on the QM9 dataset (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014) for verification. Specifically, we first pretrain on features of l≤11 to obtain a shared equivariant feature encoder, ensuring that all subsequent configurations operate on the same embedding space. We first show that the set of points with a minimal orbit type is open, then use complexification to show it is Zariski-open, which implies density. First, we compute the results for the infinite groups, followed by the polyhedral groups. For a closed subgroup H, an increase 23 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 3:Symmetry Infimum Calculation With Precomputed Results Data:A symmetry groupG; a closed subgroupH⊂G; a Rep.VofG; a mapMof previ