REAL METHOD of "Circuit Insights: Towards Interpretability Beyond Activations" (arXiv 2510.14936v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Building on this, we propose WeightLens 1 and CircuitLens2 , two complementary methods that go beyond activation-based anal- ysis. WeightLens interprets features directly from their learned weights, removing the need for explainer models or datasets while matching or exceeding the perfor- mance of existing methods on context-independent features. Together, these methods increase interpretability robustness and enhance scalable mecha- nistic analysis of circuits while maintaining efficiency and quality. Several methods have emerged in the fields of mechanistic interpretability and explainable AI to understand how models encode and utilize mechanisms that influence outputs (Olah et al., 2020; Achtibat et al., 2024; Dreyer et al., 2025). However, these studies are mainly limited to toy tasks, and understanding the roles of individual neurons and attention heads still requires extensive manual analysis (Elhage et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Bricken et al., 2023). Automated interpretability methods were proposed to address these limitations. This bottleneck prompted the development of Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs), which decompose activations into monosemantic features (Bricken et al., 2023), advancing interpretability pipelines (Templeton et al., 2024; Paulo 1github.com/egolimblevskaia/WeightLens 2github.com/egolimblevskaia/CircuitLens 1 arXiv:2510.14936v2 [cs.LG] 4 Mar 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 et al., 2025a). Unlike SAEs, which reconstruct ac- tivations, transcoders sparsely approximate entire MLP layers, while maintaining a clear separation between input-dependent and weight-dependent contributions. This architecture enables efficient circuit discovery and provides direct attributions to other features, attention heads and vocabulary. Circuit-based approach uncovers patterns missed by activation-only methods, simplifying the ex- plainer LLM’s task and improving robustness on smaller datasets by combining weight-based and circuit-based information. (2023), which consists of passing a large dataset through a model, collecting maximally activating samples for each MLP neuron, and then forwarding those samples with their per-token activations to a larger LLM to generate natural language descriptions. (2024) introduce transcoders, a sparse approximation of MLP layers that decomposes attributions into input-dependent and input-invariant components. (2024), given a transcoder structure, the attribution of transcoder featurei ′ in transcoder layerl ′ to featureiin layerl > l′ on tokentcan be expressed as: wherer (l′) pre [s]denotes the residual stream at tokensbefore the attention block in layerl ′,W (l′,h) OV is the output-value matrix of headh, andf (l,i) enc is the encoder vector of feature(l, i). Since our goal is to identify tokens that reliably characterize a feature, we introduce a validation step to check whether the feature activates on certain tokens in isolation or depends on context, in which case no stable token-level description can be assigned. The procedure is applied layer by layer, progressing from earlier to later layers. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2.Analyze weight-based feature connections:For each earlier layerl ′ < l, computeW(l′) dec · f (l) enc to identify top contributing features (outliers withz-score threshold 3). We then mask the original input sequence, keeping only tokens that either directly activated the feature or contributed significantly through attention. for each input, we collect contributing elements, such as transcoder features and token/attention head pairs via Eq. We then compute pairwise Jaccard similaritiesJ(A,B) =|S A ∩S B|/|SA ∪S B|, forming ann×n matrix. Generating DescriptionsSampled inputs are first analyzed from input- and/or output-centric per- spectives, then grouped into clusters according to the detected circuits. They are further compared to activation-based methods, specifically descriptions available on Neuronpedia (Lin, 2023), as well as generated via MaxAct* method presented by Puri et al. Across∼250 features per layer, WeightLens methods perform on par with or better than activation maximiza- tion methods. Faithfulness is low across layers and meth- ods, with the rise in the later layers, likely due to the transcoder architecture: In Gemma-2-2B, however, early layers perform slightly worse in terms of descriptions quality than later ones, as demonstrated in Figure 3, reflecting their high activation count (ℓ 0 of 70–88 for layers 0–7 in contrast toℓ 0 of 13–41 for layers 18–25 )4. Majority of the features in this layer are extremely context-dependent and encode very specific patterns. Later layers partially recover in terms of presence of token-based features, though still below early- layer levels. •CircuitLens-Input:descriptions derived from theactivation patternsof the feature, ob- tained via attribution to attention heads; •CircuitLens-Full:descriptions based on activation patterns obtained throughattributions to attention heads, augmented with tokens, which generation was influenced by the feature. Evaluation results, presented in Figure 6, show that circuit-based methods still depend on the dataset, with descriptions from the larger dataset demonstrating the strongest performance across layers, particularly on input-centric metrics. In deeper layers, most influence remains on the first gen- erated token, though multi-token output patterns also appear, and might be crucial for interpreting a feature’s function, particularly in later layers (e.g., feature L21F91 presented in Figure 9). Layer 0 shows almost no underlying circuit struc- ture beyond its own attention heads, producing mainly token-based activations, according to Figure 4, and av- eraging only 1.05 clusters per feature, as demonstrated in Figure 10. For future work, CircuitLens could be extended to architectures beyond transcoders, such as SAEs or crosscoders, by leveraging gradient-based attribution methods. Unlike sparse autoencoders (SAEs), transcoders provide a structured way to trace how upstream feature activations contribute to downstream activations, enabling circuit- level analysis across layers. However, they also show that TWERA can sig- nificantly diverge from the original transcoder weights, making it dependent on the dataset used to compute coactivations and limiting its reliability as a fully weight-based method. For evaluations, we utilized the test partition from the same dataset, applying identical pre