REAL METHOD of "Imitation Learning as Return Distribution Matching" (arXiv 2509.12026v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

IMITATIONLEARNING ASRETURNDISTRIBUTION MATCHING Filippo Lazzati Politecnico di Milano Milan, Italy filippo.lazzati@polimi.it Alberto Maria Metelli Politecnico di Milano Milan, Italy ABSTRACT We study the problem of training a risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) agent through imitation learning (IL). Unlike standard IL, our goal is not only to train an agent that matches the expert’s expected return (i.e., itsaverage performance) but also itsrisk attitude(i.e., other features of the return distribution, such as variance). We propose a general formulation of the risk-sensitive IL problem in which the objective is to match the expert’s return distribution in Wasserstein distance. After demon- strating the limited expressivity of Markovian policies for this task, we introduce an efficient and sufficiently expressive subclass of non-Markovian policies tailored to it. Building on this subclass, we develop two provably efficient algorithms—RS-BC and RS-KT —for solving the problem when the transition model is unknown and known, respectively. Finally, we complement our theoretical analysis of RS-KT and RS-BC with numer- ical simulations, highlighting both their sample efficiency and the advantages of non-Markovian policies over standard sample-efficient IL algorithms. 1 INTRODUCTION Imitation Learning (IL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Osa et al., 2018) is the problem of training an agent to behave by mimicking demonstrations from an expert. Most existing IL algorithms—including BC (Behavioral Cloning) (Pomerleau, 1988), GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016), and others (Ziebart, 2010; Reddy et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2021)—focus on finding theMarkovianpolicy that best matches the expert’soccupancy measure. First, matching occupancy measures guarantees that theexpected returnof our policy is close to the expert’s, regardless of the expert’sunknownreward (Abbeel & Ng, 2004). By focusing solely on the occupancy measure—which captures the expected value of the return distribution—standard IL algorithms are inherentlyrisk-neutral, ignoring other characteristics of the return distribution such as the variance (Mannor & Tsitsiklis, 2011). In these settings, the key aspect of the demonstrations is the expert’srisk attitude, encoded in the shape of the return distribution (Bellemare et al., 2023), but overlooked by standard IL methods. seeking theMarkovianpolicy that best matches both the expectation and the CVaR at levelα, these algorithms attempt to imitate not only the expert’s average performance but also its tail behavior. To overcome these challenges, we reformulate risk-sensitive IL as matching the expert’sentirereturn distribution, and we design algorithms that perform policy search efficiently in the space of non-Markovian policies. • We introduce an efficient and expressive subclass of non-Markovian policies for the tabular setting with aknownexpert reward, and use it to develop two provably efficient algorithms, RS-BC and RS-KT, for the cases where the transition model is unknown and known, respectively (Section 4). • Finally, we conduct numerical simulations to empirically evaluate RS-BC and RS-KT, comparing them in particular against standard provably efficient IL algorithms (Section 6). 2 PRELIMINARIES Notation.Given a natural number nPN , we define JnK :“t1,2, . Given a real number xPR , we let txu :“max mPZ:mďx m be the floor function. Given a reward r, therandomsum of rewards řH h“1 rhpsh, ahq induced by the execution ofπ is the return, and we denote its distribution, called thereturn distribution (Bellemare et al., 2023), as ηπ rpgq :“P π`řH h“1 rhpsh, ahq“g ˘ for all gPr0, Hs . Imitation Learning (IL).In IL, we are given a dataset DE “tω iuiPJNK of N trajectories ωiP ΩH`1, collected by a (potentially non-Markovian) expert policy πEPΠ NM, and the goal is to find a 1Neglecting past rewards inΠ NM is without loss of generality since we consider deterministic rewards. (1)–(2) guarantees imitation of the expert’saverage perfor- mance, i.e., its expected return J πE rE , but does not guarantee imitation of itsrisk attitude, encoded in the shape of its return distribution ηπE rE . (2019) proposed strengthening the standard IL formulation by also matching the CVaR at some level αPp0,1qofη πE rE in addition toJ πE rE . Given a parameter θPp0,1s , we define a θ-covering of the interval r0, h´1s as Y θ h :“t0, θ,2θ, . 4.2 NO-INTERACTIONSETTING In this section, we present RS-BC (Risk-Sensitive Behavior Cloning, Algorithm 1), 5 a provably efficient algorithm for RDM in the no-interaction (offline) setting, where we neither know nor have access to the transition model of the environment M, and are instead given only a dataset DE of N expert trajectories together with the expert’s reward rE. Then, choosing θ“ϵ{p4Hq , with probability at least 1´δ , the policy pπoutput by Algorithm 1 5The “behavior cloning” part in RS-BC comes from the intuition that RS-BC can be seen as performing BC after augmenting the state space with the (discretized) cumulative reward. 4.3 KNOWN-TRANSITIONSETTING In this section, we present RS-KT (Risk-Sensitive imitation with Known Transition, Algorithm 2), a provably efficient algorithm for RDM in the known-transition setting, where we have access to the transition model p of the environment, in addition to the expert’s dataset DE and reward rE. First, use the expert dataset DE to compute an estimate pηof the expert’s return distribution ηπE rE (Line 1). Then, choosing θ“ϵ{p7Hq , with probability1´δ, the policypπoutput by Algorithm 2 satisfiesWpη πE rE , ηpπ rEqďϵ, with: DoesRS-KTtruly reduce sample complexity compared toRS-BC, as predicted by theory? We select BC (Foster et al., 2024) and MIMIC-MD (Rajaraman et al., 2020; 2021) as baseline IL algorithms for, respectively, the no-interaction and known-transition settings, and address all questions by conducting various simulations following the next three-step process. and value of N, a number representing the expected error of that algorithm when given access to N expert trajectories in the considered setting. For the known-reward case, we proposed two algorithms, RS-BC and RS-KT, which not only come with strong theoretical guarantees but also empirically outperform standard IL methods at accurately matching the expert’s return distribution. Thus, since there is no dependence on the actions assigned by such policies given different trajec- tories, then the expectation simplifies to just ř bPA 1 Ap. Then, choosing θ“ϵ{p4Hq , with pro