REAL METHOD of "DriveMamba: Task-Centric Scalable State Space Model for Efficient End-to-End Autonomous Driving" (arXiv 2602.13301v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

UniAD, which follow a sequential paradigm (i.e.,perception- prediction-planning) based on separable Transformer decoders and rely on dense BEV features to encode scene representations. However, such manual ordering design can inevitably cause information loss and cumulative errors, lacking flexible and diverse relation modeling among different modules and sensors. Meanwhile, insufficient training of image backbone and quadratic-complexity of attention mechanism also hinder the scalability and efficiency of E2E-AD system to handle spatiotemporal input. To this end, we proposeDriveMamba, aTask-Centric Scalableparadigm for efficient E2E-AD, which integrates dynamic task relation modeling, implicit view correspondence learning and long-term temporal fusion into a single-stageUnifiedMamba decoder. Specifically, both extracted image fea- tures and expected task outputs are converted into token-level sparse representations in advance, which are then sorted by their instantiated positions in 3D space. Additionally, a bidi- rectional trajectory-guided“local-to-global”scan method is designed to preserve spatial locality from ego-perspective, thus facilitating the ego-planning. Benefiting from the data-driven joint optimization, E2E-AD methods showcase great efficiency with convincing performance. On one hand, such sequential design will inevitably cause information loss and cumulative errors across successive modules. Instead, ParaDrive [43] increases the module flexibility through introducing a multi-task framework with parallel transformer decoders for specific tasks as Fig. However, it still neglects the diverse task relation modeling between modules and lacks a closed-loop evaluation, thus failing to accurately reflect the actual planning performance under realistic driving conditions. Another challenge of E2E-AD system is handling spatiotemporal input with high efficiency.BEV- Centricmethods [ 12; 17; 43] rely on dense BEV feature generation to learn scene representations, which are computationally expensive especially for long-range perception. Although recent sparseQuery-Centricmethods [ 16; 37; 39] are proposed to learn sparse representations, they still have limited scalability owing to the burden of quadratic-complexity attention and lack of efficient interaction order for downstream ego-planning. Meanwhile, a first-in-first-out memory queue is generated to store the history task queries for temporal modeling during the streaming process. • We design a hybrid spatiotemporal scan method to capture task-related inter-dependencies from trajectory-guided“Local-to-Global”and“Spatial-to-Temporal”bidirectionally, which preserves better spatiotemporal locality for ego-planning. 2.2.1 TOKENFORMULATION Image Tokenization.To facilitate visual representation learning, multi-view sensor images are firstly encoded by off-the-shelf visual encoders (i.e.,ResNet [ 10], ViT [1], ViM [51]) separately to obtain sensor tokens Tsensor ∈R Nc×H×W×C , where Nc is the number of cameras, and H, Windicate the height and width of extracted feature maps after patchification. Three types of PE are considered to distinguish spatiotemporal tokens, where Spatial PE encodes the reference position of each token in BEV space, Temporal PE encodes the frame index, and Task PE encodes the task type. Moreover, we adopt an additional depth prediction branch to estimate point-level depth for each sensor token respectively,instead of relying on the uniformly distributed ray-level 3D positions used in DriveTransformer [16], which cannot be directly employed for token sorting.Specifically, for each image token i with pixel coordinate(u i, vi)of camerak, its corresponding location in 3D space is: Considering the diversity and uncertainty of multi-modal ego-planning, we introduce a trajectory-guided attention map to dynami- cally adjust the scan order based on the relative distances between the interpolated future waypoints ψ′ ∈R T ′ e×2 of ego-vehicle and 3D positions Ptask of surrounding task queries (i.e.,agents and maps) at intermediate layers. 7 demonstrate that an alternation ofHorizontal/V ertical-Firstbidirectional scan across consecutive decoder layers can preserve better spatial locality for view correspondence learning between task queries and sensor tokens, whileTrajectory-Centric Local2Globalbidirectional scan is well designed for task relation modeling and motion planning from ego-perspective. 4) consists of three types of B-Mamba layers for different usages: We usejoint modeling typewith a single-layer B-Mamba for each type as discussed in Sec. View Correspondence Learning.After bidirectional serialization according to reference positions of task queries Ptask, we adopt a single B-Mamba layer to allow task queries to directly extract task- specific semantics from raw sensor features with 3D position encoding [25; 34], without construction of dense BEV features and information loss: Cross-view corre- spondence between desired task outputs and raw sensor inputs can be learned implicitly with linear attention during the joint training. 1, we design four different variants of DriveMamba architecture with different model sizes. The unified decoder consists of L layers with C channel dimensions. 2.2.5 TASKHEAD Object Detection & Motion Prediction.In DriveMamba, the head for each task generally consists of 2 Fully Connected (FC) layers. Meanwhile, vectorized planning constrains identified in [ 17] such as collision, overstepping and direction are also included in Lplan for regularization. Through deepening the visual encoder and task decoder with more stacking layers, the open-loop planning performance can be further boosted as expected, showcasing the great advantages of our proposed unified yet scalable Mamba paradigm for interactive planning. However, we compare the performance of joint modeling with a single B-Mamba layer and divided modeling with a shared B-Mamba layer in Tab. 2 and 3.(3)Attention Type:Compared to Transformer-based end-to-end planners, our DriveMamba adopts linear-complexity SSM to learn ego-centric driving attention from sequential task tokens and achieves 3.2× increase in processing speed and requires 68.8% less GPU memory consumption when scaling up input resolution directly as shown in Fig. 6, we study the framework scalability through scaling up both encoder and decoder respectively.(1)Encoder:When scaling up the visual backbone from ResNet-50, ResNet- 101 to VMamba-B/16 and ViT-L/16, we ca