REAL METHOD of "SimpleFold: Folding Proteins is Simpler than You Think" (arXiv 2509.18480v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this paper, we introduceSimpleFold, the first flow-matching based protein folding model that solely uses general purpose transformer blocks. Protein folding models typically employ computationally expensive modules involving triangular updates, explicit pair representations or multiple training objectives curated for this specific domain. Instead, SimpleFold employs standard transformer blocks with adaptive layers and is trained via a generative flow-matching objective with an additional structural term. On standard folding benchmarks, SimpleFold-3B achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines, in addition SimpleFold demonstrates strong performance in ensemble prediction which is typically difficult for models trained via deterministic reconstruction objectives. Inspired by the recent success of generative models in the vision domain we build a general- purpose yet powerful architecture based solely on standard transformer blocks with adaptive layers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Peebles and Xie, 2023) which we trained at larger scale than previous protein folding models, both in terms of model size and training data. In this paper, we propose a strong departure from domain-specific designs towards a much more general architectural design which has been demonstrated to be effective in generative modeling problems and can ultimately leverage data and compute as effectively as possible. In this work, we proposeSimpleFold, a flow-matching based folding model that directly maps a protein sequence to its full 3D atomic structure without relying on MSA, pairwise interaction maps, triangular updates or any other equivariant geometric modules. Our architecture is inspired by recent transformer-based text-to-image and text-to-3D flow matching models (Peebles and Xie, 2023; Ma et al., 2024), with a strong emphasis on 2 departing from current architecture designs using a general-purpose transformer backbone trained end-to-end with a flow-matching training objective. In flow matching, we train a networkvθ to match the target across time and data viaℓ2 regression objective E[||vθ(xt, t) − vt||2]. 3 Training objective.The networkv θ takes the amino acid sequence as a conditioning inputvθ(xt, s, t)to model the target velocity field. This loss measures the atomic pairwise distances error between the generated structureˆx(xt)at timestep t and ground truth structuresx. During training,ˆx(xt)is estimated through one step Euler, i.e., ˆx(xt) =x t + (1−t)v θ(xt,s, t). ℓ=ℓ FM +α(t)ℓ LDDT,(2.4) where α(t)is a weighting term related to timestept in flow process and is also dependent to different training phases (see Sect. Timestep resampling.To improve training efficiency and force generating structures with fine details (Esser et al., 2024; Geffner et al., 2025), the timestept is sampled from the distribution:p(t) = 0.98LN(0.8, 1.7) + 0.02U (0, 1), where LN is logistic-normal distribution (Atchison and Shen, 1980) andU is a uniform distribution. Unlike popular timestep resampling in image generation (Esser et al., 2024), where timesteps are more densely sampled in the middle of the flow process (i.e., aroundt = 0.5), we shift the sample weight towards timesteps that are closer to clean data (i.e.,t = 1), similar to findings in (Geffner et al., 2025) in the context of unconditional generation. Additional details regarding the LDDT loss and timestep resampling can be found in Appendix C.2. In a strong departure from previous approaches, SimpleFold uses an architecture solely based on general-purpose transformer modules (see comparison in Fig. 2 we show an architecture diagram of SimpleFold, which contains three major modules: All modules are implemented with standard transformer blocks with adaptive layers conditioned on the timestept(see bottom left of Fig. The atom encoder takes in “noisy“ atomic coordinatesxt together with their corresponding atomic features (e.g., atomic type and charge, see Appendix A for details) and outputs atom tokensa∈R Na×da, wherex t is encoded through Fourier positional embeddings. In the atom encoder we use a local attention mask that constraints atom latents to only attend to a local neighborhood around their residue (i.e., atom tokens only attend to atom tokens of nearby residues in the sequence). Figure 2Overview of SimpleFold’s architecture built on general-purpose standard Transformer block with adaptive layers. Lo- cal attention masks are also applied in the atom decoder as the encoder. The first three axes are 3D atomic coordinates from reference conform- ers (see Appendix A), which are local structures predicted at the amino acid level by a rule-based cheminformatic method. Unlike AlphaFold2 (Chakravarty and Porter, 2022) or ESMFold (Lin et al., 2023b) which explicitly keep a pair representation initialized by embeddings from expensive MSA search or attention score from the pretrained PLM, SimpleFold only keeps a single sequence representation which does not require triangle update and is thus far more efficient. To handle the rotational symmetries of protein structures, we apply SO(3) data augmentation during training, which randomly rotates structure targets, and rely on the capacity of the model to directly learn such symmetries during training. After the folding model is fully trained, we train the pLDDT module in a separate training stage while freezing all the parameters in the folding model (see Fig. During training the pLDDT module, we sample protein structures ˆx on the fly, and feedˆx into the folding model with timestept = 1for adaptive layers to acquire the final residue tokensr. The pLDDT module is composed of 4 layers of standard transformer blocks without adaptive layers, which takes inrand outputs pLDDT. Following (Chakravarty and Porter, 2022), the target LDDT is discretized into 50 bins and the pLDDT module is trained through a cross-entropy objective. Since larger models with larger capacity benefit from larger training sets, we train our largest SimpleFold-3B on the distilled AFESM-E data together with PDB and SwissProt. However, (Jing et al., 2024a) were not build from the ground up as generative models and instead rely on powerful pretrained AlphaFold2 and ESMFold models which were trained with a deterministic regression objective. Pre-training.The overall training of SimpleFold consistent of two training stages pre-training and finetuning, which only differ on the data used to train the model. pLDDT training.After Simpl