REAL METHOD of "Synthesising Counterfactual Explanations via Label-Conditional Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoders" (arXiv 2510.04855v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

First, we introduce the Label-conditional Gaussian Mixture Vari- ational Autoencoder (L-GMV AE), a model trained to learn a structured latent space where each class label is represented by a set of Gaussian components with diverse, prototypical centroids. CEs are espe- cially useful for providing algorithmic recourse, such as offering actionable suggestions to a bank customer who was denied a loan by an algorithmic decision-making system. Given a dataset with a trained classifier’s predictions (Left), a L-GMV AE is first learned with latent clusters (Gaussian components), capturing the data distribution with the classifier’s predictions. Indeed, if a method finds CEs that are readily invalidated under some model updates, or provides significantly different CEs for nearly identical inputs, the CEs are likely based on arbitrary model behaviour and algorithmic artefacts, rather than meaningful features. A recent state-of-the-art method enhances robustness to input changes by leveraging diverse in- stances of nearest neighbours in the training dataset from the target class (Leofante & Potyka, 2024). However, this method remains heuristic and cannot guarantee perfect stability given the randomness in its distance-based thresholding process, and risks exposing sensitive training data. Building on this model, we introduceLAPACE(LA tent PAth Counterfactual Explanations), a sim- ple yet effective method for generating paths describing smooth trajectories that connect inputs to their CEs. 2 RELATEDWORK Counterfactual explanationsare typically computed using specialised algorithms with gradient descent (Wachter et al., 2017) or mixed integer programming (Mohammadi et al., 2021) to address validity and proximity. Unlike most existing methods which address these properties in isolation, our proposed method is designed to simultaneously address a comprehensive set of these properties within a single, unified framework. A simplified variant by Shu (2016) incorporates the assignment variable directly into the encoder, yielding more effective clustering. The most intuitive approach for partitioning is to uniformly assignK/L clusters for each class. Handling categorical data.Additionally, L-GMV AE can accommodate one-hot-encoded (OHE) categorical data by simply adding a sigmoid function at the decoder’s final layer dimensions which correspond to the categorical dimensions. During training, the reconstruction loss for these dimen- sions uses binary cross-entropy loss. This is enforced by two components – the reconstruction loss ensures that the decoded centroid is a valid class instance, while the KL ofz loss positions the centroid at the geometric centre of all data points assigned to that cluster. 3.2 LATENTPATHS ANDCOUNTERFACTUALEXPLANATIONS Algorithm 1LAPACE Require:x,y,y ′,z cj forc j ∈ Cy′,Enc, Dec, interpolation stepsT={0, . Then, for a target counterfactual classy ′ and its associ- ated clustersC y′,Dec(z cj )is the reconstructed cluster centroid for eachc j ∈ Cy′. For inputxwith predicted labely=M(x)and a target classy ′ for its CE, we first obtain its latent representationz x via theEncoder of L-GMV AE. Then, latent paths are obtained fromz x to eachz cj ,c j ∈ Cy′ via linear interpolation, denoted asz x→cj ,τ := (1−τ)z x +τ zcj with finite stepsτ∈[0,1]. Once the L-GMV AE is trained, LAPACE is simple and effective, eliminating the need for gradient-based optimisation in the latent space and avoiding a complex hyperparameter-tuning process (as the step size is relatively trivial) for the CE generation process. 3.3 ACCOMMODATINGACTIONABILITYCONSTRAINTS LAPACE also supports actionability constraints defining whether and how portions of the input space (e.g. To model the satisfaction of these constraints, we use a a differentiable functiong(xi), whereg(x i)≤0 indicates that the constraint is satisfied. At eachτstep during the latent space interpolation, we evaluate whether the constraints are satisfied viag(Dec(z x→cj ,τ )). We split each dataset into a train and a test set for training classifiers. To demonstrate the model-agnostic nature of our approach, we train a random forest and a neural network for each dataset, which we use to compute the CEs. L-GMV AE training and evaluation.The train set is further split into a train and a test set for L- GMV AE training and evaluation. An L-GMV AE is obtained for each dataset-classifier pair, learning the classifier’s predictions on the new training set. Then, we train new random forest classifiers respectively using the new train set and the new synthetic train set, and eval- uate their accuracy on the new test set. CE evaluation procedure and metrics 1.For each dataset-classifier pair, we obtain a CE test set of 100 test points predicted with label 0. We then use each method to generate CEs and evaluate on the following metrics. we obtain 20 retrained classifiers using different selections of the dataset as the training set, and test on average how many CEs are valid on these new classifiers.Robustness to Input Changesevaluates the stability of generated CEs 1The evaluation metrics and baseline method implementations are adapted from CARLA library (Pawelczyk et al., 2021) and RobustX library (Jiang et al., 2025). We perturb the test input 10 times with small noises, generate new CEs for each of the perturbations, and report the average distance between the new CEs and the original CE (or max-set-distance (Leofante & Potyka, 2024) if the method supports finding multiple CEs per input). We randomly select 5 constraints for each test input, which are then enforced on a path of CEs and check if there is at least one CE satisfying all constraints while staying valid. The CE desirable properties addressed by each CE method in our experiments.✓(*) indicates the property is explicitly taken into account (implicitly encouraged) by the method. Because LAPACE generates a path of CE points, to enable direct comparison with the baselines, we take CE points at three different locations in the path.LAPACE-Firstrefers to the first CE point which turns the prediction label, when moving from the original input to the reconstructed centroids.LAPACE-Lastrefers to the last points in each CE path – the reconstructed centroids. In contrast, LAPACE allows building the constraints into CE generation, as introduced in Section 3.3 (LAPACE-constrained). In terms of diversity, our methods outperform DiCE and DRCE on datasets with mixed data types but perform worse on the t