REAL METHOD of "Do We Need All the Synthetic Data? Targeted Image Augmentation via Diffusion Models" (arXiv 2505.21574v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we introduce TADA (TArgetedDiffusionAugmentation), a principled framework that selectively augments examples that are not learned early in training using faithful synthetic images that preserve semantic features while varying noise. Extensive experiments demonstrate that by augmenting only 30–40% of the training data, TADA improves generalization by up to 2.8% across diverse architectures including ResNet, ViT, ConvNeXt, and Swin Transformer on CIFAR-10/100, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet, using optimizers such as SGD and SAM. Does synthetically augmenting the full data yield optimal performance? Can we identify a part of the data that outperforms full data, when synthetically augmented? At first, this seems implausible as adding synthetic images corresponding to only a part of the training data introduces a shift between training and test data distributions and harms the in-distribution performance. First, by analyzing a two-layer convolutional neural network (CNN), we show that SAM suppresses learning noise from the data, while speeding up learning slow-learnable features. To find examples with slow-learnable features, we partition the data to two parts by clustering model outputs early in training and identify the cluster with higher average loss. Finally, we prove the convergence properties of training on our synthetically augmented data with stochastic gradient methods. Two-layer CNN Model.We use a dataset D={(x i, yi)}N i=1 from distribution 3.1 to train a two-layer nonlinear CNN with activation functionsσ(z) =z 3. Definition 3.2(Two-layer CNN).For one data point (x, y), the two-layer Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with weights W= [w 1,w 2,· · ·,wJ ]∈R d×J, where wj is weight of the j-th 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 neuron (filter), has the form: High-level idea of SAM.By perturbing the weights with gradient ascent ( ϵ(t) =ρ (t)∇L(W (t))), SAM looks ahead in theworstweight direction and forces the training algorithm to escape an unstable (sharp) local minimum. Then, we introduce TADA (TArgetedDiffusionAugmentation) and discuss generating synthetic data to amplify features in images without magnifying their noise. Fomally, we prove that starting with the same weights W (t), a SAM step suppresses the model’s alignment with noise directions more effectively than an equivalent gradient descent step. We define I (t) j,+, I (t) j,− accordingly for each GD weight w(t) j . If an example contains at least one fast-learnable feature that is learned by the model early in training, the model relies on such features to lower the loss and potentially correctly classify the example early in training. Thus, examples that only include slow-learnable features can be identified based on loss or misclassification, or by partitioning model outputs to two clusters after a few training epochs and selecting the cluster with the higher average loss. Specifically, the forward process progressively adds noise to the data x0 over T steps, with each step modeled as a Gaussian transition: Then we be- gin denoising from time-step t∗, using an open-source text-to-image model, e.g. We also conduct an ablation study on different parts of our method. For generating synthetic images using GLIDE, we use guidance scale of 3 and run denoising for 100 steps, saving generated images every 10 steps. 5.1 TADAISEFFECTIVE ACROSSDATASETS ANDARCHITECTURES Different datasets.Figure 2 clearly shows that TADA significantly reduces the test classification error compared to both theOriginalandUSEFULmethods across all datasets, namely CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and Tiny-ImageNet. Different model architectures.To further evaluate the generalization of our approach, we conduct experiments on multiple model architectures usingCIFAR10as the base dataset. The results demonstrate that TADA achieves consistently lower classification error than both theOriginalandUSEFULmethods across all architectures, under both SGD and SAM optimization settings. Do We Need All the Synthetic Data?To answer this question, we compare synthetically augmenting all examples (Syn-all)–which doubles the training set size–with TADA with k= 2 –which results in increase of approximately 30% and 40% of the total training data–in CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Number of denoising steps.Figure 6c demonstrates the effect of the number of denoising steps on the performance of TADA. We proposed TADA (TArgetedDiffusionAugmentation), a principled framework that selectively augments examples not learned early in training using faithful synthetic images with diverse noise. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic programming.SIAM journal on optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013. Proof.We compute the gradient directly from the loss function: We first note that for some early training weights W (t), we have the following connection between the original weights and the SAM perturbed weights: First, for GD, each noise update is computed via: This highlights the necessity of incorporating synthetic data and motivates our method. We include Table 3 to compare it with other augmentation methods, including classical ones, naive diffusion-based generation, and mix-based methods such as mixup (Zhang et al. The dataset consists of 500 training images, 50 validation images, and 50 test images per class. Training on different datasets.From the setting in (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2022), we trained Pre-Activation ResNet18 on all datasets for 200 epochs with a batch size of 128. Training with different architectures.We used the same training procedures for Pre-Activation ResNet18, VGG19, and DenseNet121. For our method, the upsampling factor k is set to 5 for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 while that of TinyImageNet is set to 4. Initial Training 3:Train the modelf(·, W (0))on datasetDfortepochs 4:Step 2: Method Dataset k Denoising steps USEFUL CIFAR10 2 CIFAR100 2 Tiny-ImageNet 2 TADA CIFAR10 5 40, 50, 70, 80 CIFAR100 5 40, 50, 70, 80 Tiny-ImageNet 4 50, 70, 80 Computational resources.We used 1 NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU for model training and 4 NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs for generating. F.2 ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS State-of-the-art architectures.To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we evaluated it on two widely used modern vision backbones: In particular, for ConvNeXt-T, our approach achieves a nearly 7% reduction in test error compared to the second-best method, highlighting its strong compatibility with modern architectures. Effect 