REAL METHOD of "Pursuing Minimal Sufficiency in Spatial Reasoning" (arXiv 2510.16688v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We identify two fundamental bottlenecks:inadequate3D understanding capabilities stemming from 2D-centric pre-training, and reasoning failures induced byredundant3D information. To address these, we first construct a Minimal Sufficient Set (MSS) of information before answering a given question: We introduceMSSR(Minimal Sufficient Spatial Reasoner), a dual-agent framework that implements this principle. APer- ception Agentprogrammatically queries 3D scenes using a versatile perception toolbox to extract sufficient information, including a novelSOG(Situated Ori- entation Grounding) module that robustly extracts language-grounded directions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method, by explicitly pursuing both sufficiency and minimality, significantly improves accuracy and achieves state-of-the-art performance across two challenging benchmarks. Motivated by this principle, we introduceMSSR(MinimalSufficientSpatial Reasoner), a zero-shot framework that operationalizes this pursuit through a dual-agent architecture. • We design aperception agentthat has access to a versatile toolbox including a SOG module for robust directional grounding; and areasoning agentthat directs the entire process and provides final answers. By preserving the VLM’s full capabilities and instead explicitly structuring the perception-reasoning process, our approach maximizes spatial reasoning performance without compromising the model’s versatility or requiring costly data and retraining. Before answering the 3D reasoning question, our approach first builds a Minimal Sufficient Set (MSS)—a compact representation that is both sufficient to answer the query and minimal to prevent failures from redundant and distracting information. 3.1 OVERVIEW As illustrated in Figure 2, our method actively curates the MSS. Its objective is to generate a Python script that invokes the appropriate foundation modules to fulfill the directive. Spatial Reasoning Modules.The Perception Agent implements directives by invoking a curated suite of spatial modules, which bridge high-level goals and raw perceptual data to construct the MSS. a locate module that utilizes vision expert models (Liu et al., 2024; Ravi et al., 2024) to pinpoint object coordinates in 3D, and a computation module that offloads complex numerical tasks, such as coordinate frame transformations. More critically, to address challenges often overlooked by prior work, we propose novel modules designed for more robust spatial reasoning. We introduce the SOG module, which utilizesVisual Prompting(Qi et al., 2025) to ground complex, language-conditioned directional concepts into 3D vectors. In the first stage,Plan-Guided Information Curation, the RA formulates a high-level reasoning plan outlining the necessary steps to answer the query. It then discards all prior context and reasons exclusively over this final, minimal set using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) to produce 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 1:Comparison with baselines on MMSI-Bench and ViewSpatial-Bench.Our method performs favorably against previous methods on these challenging spatial reasoning tasks. Blue is to highlight the improvement of our method over GPT-4o backbone. This design endows our method with strong generalization capabilities and mitigates the risk of overfitting to dataset-specific exemplars. 4 EXPERIMENTS 4.1 BENCHMARKS ANDBASELINES We evaluate our method and various baseline models on two challenging spatial reasoning benchmarks. 4.2 MAINRESULTS On the MMSI-Bench, our method achieves an overall accuracy of49.5%. When contrasted with state-of-the-art 3D-VLM models such as VLM-3R (32.0%), generalist model such as LEO (39.3%), and agentic frameworks such as ViLaSR (30.2%), our method maintains a clear lead. Transitioning to the ViewSpatial-Bench, which focuses on multi-viewpoint spatial localization and recognition, our method again sets a new benchmark with an overall accuracy of51.8%. The consistent strength observed in both Camera Based (51.0%) and Person Based (54.4%) tasks highlights our method’s robust generalization across varied spatial viewpoints. For these problems, we created sufficiency-normalized information sets for each step by retrospectively adding critical information (discovered in iterations) to earlier, larger sets. This process grounds the RA’s abstract reasoning in gathered spatial information by systematically interleaving its high-level strategic steps (e.g., “I need to determine the chair’s position”) with the specific perceptual evidence from the MSS that substantiates each step (e.g., “The Locate module confirms the chair is at [x,y,z]”). The more demanding Multi-hop Spatial Reasoning (MSR) sub-task within MMSI-Bench, which often needs intricate multi-step information retrieval and reasoning, demands an average 2.41 iterations. C MODULEIMPLEMENTATIONS This section provides a detailed explanation of the implementation specifics for each specialized module within the Perception Agent’s toolkit. C.1 RECONSTRUCTIONMODULE Functionality:This module transforms sparse 2D images I into a coherent 3D scene representation. C.2 OBJECTLOCALIZATIONMODULE Functionality:This module localizes objects in the 3D scene based on natural language queries. C.3 GLOBALCOORDINATECALIBRATIONMODULE Functionality:This module establishes a scene-level directional coordinate system (e.g., North, South, East, West or equivalently Front, Back, Left, Right) based on natural language calibration such as “the table is north of the chair.” With this calibrated system, relative directional relations of other objects (e.g., “the cabinet is to the west of the chair”) can be consistently computed. Calibration via Reference Relation:Given a calibration statement “A is north of B,” along with the 3D world coordinates of objects A (target) and B (anchor), both objects are first projected onto the ground plane estimated previously: The direction from anchor to target is then defined as thenorthvector: C.4 SITUATEDORIENTATIONGROUNDING(SOG) MODULE Functionality:The Situated Orientation Grounding (SOG) module leveragesVisual Prompting(Qi et al., 2025) to align complex, language-conditioned directional concepts with explicit 3D vectors. Grounded Vector Generation:Given an input image, the camera pose, and the 3D location of a target object Po (obtained from the Object Localization Module), we first select a representative point near the ground plane within the object’s poi