REAL METHOD of "Composite Optimization with Error Feedback: the Dual Averaging Approach" (arXiv 2510.03507v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, standard Error Feedback (EF) methods (Seide et al., 2014), though effective for smooth unconstrained optimization with compression (Karimireddy et al., 2019), fail in the broader and practically important setting of composite optimization, which captures, e.g., objectives consisting of a smooth loss combined with a non-smooth regularizer or constraints. We propose a novel method that combinesDual AveragingwithEControl(Gao et al., 2024a), a state-of-the-art variant of theEFmechanism, and achieves for the first time a strong convergence analysis for composite optimization with error feedback. Along with our new algorithm, we also provide a new and novel analysis template for inexact dual averaging method, which might be of independent interest. 1 Introduction Gradient methods, and in particular, distributed gradient methods, are the workhorse of modern Machine Learning. 1 arXiv:2510.03507v1 [math.OC] 3 Oct 2025 The sizes of the datasets and models in modern Machine Learning have been growing drastically, leading to unique challenges in the training process and demands optimization algorithms that are tailored to these new settings. The only work that goes beyond the classical unconstrained setting is (Islamov et al., 2025),1 who proposedSafe-EFfor constrained optimization. We develop novel algorithmic and analytical tools, and we are the first to obtain matching rates (or any rates) forEFwhenψ̸≡0. This reminds us of theDual Averagingframework, where the algorithm sums up all the past gradients and take one step from the initial point at each step. The objective function F is a composite objective with the smooth part f (x) := 1 n Pn i=1 fi(x)and the composite part ψ : In this work, we are interested in minimizing the total (client to server, uplink)communication costof the algorithm (for each client). Suppose that throughout the algorithm, each client makesa compressed 4 Algorithm 1Inexact Dual Averaging 1:Input:x 0 and{a t, γt ∈R +}t=0,...,∞.γ t is non-decreasing. In the analysis of our main method, Algorithm 2, we eventually only need Assumption 2.5. 3 The Inexact Dual A veraging Method In this section, we take a step back from the distributed optimization problem with communication compression that we consider in the rest of the paper, and consider solving a general stochastic composite optimization problem of the formF ⋆ = minx∈domψ[F (x) = f (x) + ψ(x)]. E[g(x, ξ)] =∇f(x),E ξ  ∥g(x, ξ)− ∇f(x)∥2 ≤σ 2 g.(8) We study the convergence of the general inexact dual averaging algorithm, as summarized in Algorithm 1, for solving this problem. We note that these virtual iterates are not explicitly computed or stored anywhere in the algorithm. ¯xT = arg min x∈domψ " ⟨¯g,x⟩+ψ(x) T−1X t=0 at + γτ 2 ∥x−x 0∥2 # We summarize this procedure in Algorithm 3 in Section E. At the end of the algorithm, we use one full communication round to collect the local¯gi and compute the output¯xT. Now, as the main focus of this section, we present a specific mechanism of generating theˆgt ≈ gt, the EControlmethod (summarized in Algorithm 4 in Section G), using mainly compressed communication channels. We can put Algorithms 1, 3 and 4 together to get our final algorithm,EControl with Dual Averaging, summarized in Algorithm 2 (see Section F for a more detailed walk-through of the algorithm). Lemma 4.3.Given Assumptions 2.1 and 2.3 to 2.5, and letη = δ 3√1−δ(1+√1−δ) , γ≥ 24 √ 2ℓ δ , then we have: In particular, this means that with three rounds of uncompressed communication (one for the initial stochastic gradient step, one communicatingˆg−1 and one communicating ¯g), and T rounds of compressed communications, Algorithm 2 reaches the desired accuracy. Figure 1:Synthetic regularized softmax objective in communications for Algorithm 2 to get: Remark4.5.In the statement of Theorem 4.4 we let the algorithm take one initial exact stochastic gradient step in the composite setting. Without the extra initial step, the algorithm would still converge (with properly chosen step size) but the rate would additionally depend onF0 (though it would still be a desirableO( 1 δε )term). To resolve this, we introduced the first framework that integrates error feedback with dual averaging, which restores the summation structure and enables control of accumulated compression errors. An exciting avenue for future work is to connect our approach with recent efforts that aim to simplify error-feedback methods for practical use, potentially leading to more robust and scalable communication-efficient algorithms. 3 2 Problem Formulation and Assumptions 4 3 The Inexact Dual Averaging Method 5 3.1 A Sampling Procedure for the Virtual Iterates . TheEF21algorithm, though comes withEF in its name, is purely a gradient difference compression mechanism, and is the the first to fully support contractive compression in the full gradient regime. Their analysis requires that the constraint setQ be described as an intersection of sublevel sets of functions, with first-order information of these functions available. Under this structural assumption, their method blends updates in the direction of both the objective and the constraint functions, enabling the virtual iterate to account for constraints. In additional, we note thatEControlwith Dual Averaging admits a much larger stepsize than the other methods, which might explain its superior performance. Now we show that one gradient step will lead to an upper bound on the objective value. T−1X t=0  γt +γ t−1 −a tL 2at ∥xt+1 −x t∥2 +⟨ ˆgt − ∇f(xt),x t+1 −x t⟩  ≤F(x 0)−F(x T )+ 1 2 T−1X t=0 (βtρ2 t −βtρ2 t+1) E Sampling Procedure for Virtual Iterates Algorithm 3Sampling Procedure for Virtual Iterates 1: We first summarize the procedure for clarity as Algorithm 3. Proposition E.1.Given a stream of points {xk}∞ k=1 in Rd and positive scalars {hk}∞ k=1, we can maintain, at each stepk≥ 1, the random variablext(k), where t(k)is a random index from{1, . Then, at each stepk≥ 1, we update Hk ←H k−1 + hk and also, with probability hk Hk , we update ¯xk ← xk (or, with probability1 − hk Hk , keep the old¯xk = ¯xk−1). Note that, for any1 ≤i≤k , the event¯xk =x i happens iff ¯x was updated at stepi and then not updated at each stepj=i+ 1, . 22 F Description of Full Algorithm In this section, we describe Algorithm 2 in more details for clarity. The algorithm combines Algorithms 1 and 3 and Algorithm 4 together. The clients then proceed to compute their local stochastic gradientgi t, and add it to their l