REAL METHOD of "PI-Light: Physics-Inspired Diffusion for Full-Image Relighting" (arXiv 2601.22135v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

First, inspired by Wonder3D (Long et al., 2024), during both inverse neural rendering and neural forward rendering stages, we extend standard self-attention layers to be global-aware, en- abling communication across batches. Second, we design a physics-inspired neural forward rendering module, where the physics-based loss serves as an efficient learning mechanism. As a result, our method achieves competitive performance and generalizes well to real-world scenes, even with fewer training samples than previous works (Zeng et al., 2024b; Liang et al., 2025) and without access to fully realistic datasets. By training on this dataset, combined with the image prior from pretraining,π-Light demonstrates strong generalization across diverse objects and scenes, as extensively validated in our experiments. • Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method over previous models. However, due to the difficulty of acquiring large-scale training data, these methods have limited applicability and are primarily designed for specific scenarios, such as indoor scenes (Zhu et al., 2022; Kocsis et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2020) or object-level inverse rendering (Zhang et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024a; Jin et al., 2024). We further discuss the differences between our method and these two approaches in Appendix A.11.1. Inverse Neural Rendering.Given a 2D image as input, this stage repurposes a pretrained image diffusion model to simultaneously predict four intrinsic components: The encoderEencodes the input image in a 2D latent spacez. Thus, the overall LDM framework consists of a denoising network (U-Net) and an autoencoder. 4 METHODOLOGY In this section, we present our dataset construction pipeline along with our two-stage method. An overview of our method is illustrated in Fig. The CLIP image embedding of the condition inputs go into the cross-attention layers as well. The standard self-attention layers are extended to be global-aware, enabling communication across batches. as described in equation 8, our model separately outputs the diffuse and specular components, and the final rendered relighted image is obtained through a loss constraint which is illustrated in Sec. As a result, our method effectively reconstructs highlights under the given conditions, shown in Fig. 6 4.3.2 TRAININGOBJECTIVES Since physical laws lose their meaning when computed in the latent space, our physics-based losses for the relighting model are applied entirely in the RGB space, i.e., it is computed after the V AE decoder reconstructs the output, as mentioned in Sec. Contrast + brightness enhancement Normal 16*32 light map from grey ball diffuse Enhanced diffuse Lambertian Reflection Input image Normal Map Gray ball Environment Map Diffuse Map (without cast shadow) Figure 4:Diffuse Shading Loss.We incorporate a manually computed loss using the Lambertian model, without requiring ground truth annotations of diffuse shading. Diffuse Shading Loss.Since obtaining ground-truth diffuse reflectance is challenging in certain cases and some scene lighting con- ditions may be inaccurate, we incorporate a manually-computed loss based on the normal map and environment map. N= [ nx,n y,n z]T , N∈R 3×H×W ,(9) U V= [ 1 π tan−1( nx nz ), 2 π cos−1(ny)−1], D calculated = grid sample(Ediff , U V),(10) Finally, we compute the calculated diffuse loss between the calculated diffuse mapDcalculated and the predicted diffuse mapD pred decoded from latent prediction: LDS =M SE(Dcalculated, Dpred)(11) Physical-based Shading Loss.To ensure that the rendered results are shaded according to the given lighting conditions and adhere to physical principles, we define a physics-based loss as shown in Eq. LPS =M SE(Irelit, A⊙Dpred +S pred),(12) Reconstruction Loss.To ensure that the overall content of the image remains unchanged before and after relighting, we introduce a reconstruction loss. This loss is computed as a perceptual loss by extracting features from both images using the DINO feature extractor and measuring the difference between them. Lstage2 =L V-pred + 1 t (λ1LDS +λ 2LPS +λ 3Lrec).(14) whereλ 1, λ2, λ3 are three constants to weight the losses,tis the timestep of the diffusion noise. 5 EXPERIMENTS 5.1 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS Training.We trained for80kiterations in stage one and90kiterations in stage two using eight 40GB A100 GPUs, with a batch size of 8 and a learning rate of1e −5, optimized using Adam. Our method produces more detailed and accurate results, even in specular reflection regions. Our method outperforms most of the metrics on both object and scene level test dataset. Our method outperforms other state- of-the-art methods on object50 test dataset. 5, our method produces more precise and clearer results. For instance, in the first row, our model successfully predicts the albedo of objects reflected in a mirror, whereas other methods incorrectly treat them as part of the mirror surface. In comparison, our method does not suffer from these issues and achieves more faithful relighting results. Qualitative comparisons in the abla- tion study for the effects of decomposition and the two shading loss functions proposed in our method.(zoom in for a better view) Table 3: Quantitative comparison between pipelines with and without decomposition, as well as with and without the two shading loss functions proposed in our method. The Effectiveness of the Diffuse Shading Loss and Physical-based Shading Loss.As shown in Fig. Our method incorporates physical light transport, enabling controllable illumination while preserving the intrinsic physical properties of objects. 5, we reproduce RGB↔X (Zeng et al., 2024b) following the training details in their paper and retrained RGB↔X on the same dataset used by our method. Even after retraining RGB↔X on our dataset, our method consistently achieves better performance, demonstrating that the methodological design itself also contributes to the performance gain. Despite the shorter training schedule, our model still outperforms Neural Gaffer on this shared training set, demonstrating that the performance gains are attributable not only to the dataset but also to the effectiveness of our proposed architecture. Dataset Method Albedo Normal Roughness Metallic AveragePSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ Object50RGB↔X (Zeng et al., 2024b)20.090.91280.073722.780.90390.079318.430.90610.075215.970.84040.122619.320.89080.0877RGB↔X (retrained) (Zeng et al