REAL METHOD of "Spatially Guided Training for Vision-Language-Action Model" (arXiv 2602.10109v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce ST4VLA, a dual-system Vision–Language–Action framework that leveragesSpatial GuidedTraining to align action learning with spatial priors in VLMs. (i) spatial grounding pre-training, which equips the VLM with transferable pri- ors via scalable point, box, and trajectory prediction from both web-scale and robot-specific data, and (ii) spatially guided action post-training, which encourages the model to produce richer spatial priors to guide action generation via spatial prompting. Given a task instruction, the VLM planner produces latent plans through explicit spatial prompting, which then effectively guides the action expert to generate control signals. naive fine-tuning VLM to VLA or joint training with spatial data yield weak alignment between spatial perception and action-learning objectives, which undermines spatial grounding during policy learning. To address the fundamental gap between multimodal understanding and embodied control, we proposeST4VLA, a dual-system vision–language–action framework that explicitly integratesspatial priorsinto robot control through spatial guided training. First, it preserves spatial grounding during policy learning, thereby avoiding the collapse observed in naive co-training. • We observe that directly fine-tuning a VLM with an action expert as a VLA model leads to a collapse of spatial priors, and that na¨ıve co-training with spatial data introduces gradient conflicts between spatial grounding and action objectives. • We propose ST4VLA, a spatially guided training framework that explicitly aligns action optimiza- tion with spatial grounding objectives, preserving perception while enabling robust control. 2 METHODS We propose ST4VLA, a spatially guided training framework that bridges spatial understanding with embodied control through a novel two-stage training recipe 2.2. Stage 2 | Spatially Guided Action Post-training VLM - Planner Stage 1 | Spatial Grounding Pre-training Multimodal understanding robot observation Spatial Grounding (box / point / trace) multi-modal web data [box] [trace] VLM real & sim robot data Organize the table. 2.1 MODELARCHITECTURE Dual-system, Dual-supervision.We propose a new a dual-system, end-to-end VLA framework based on Qwen2.5-VL, which can foster alignment between the optimization dynamics of the spatial grounding objective and the action policy objective. System 2 (the VLM planner) employs as a multimodal encoder to capture spatial and semantic priors, while System 1 (the Action Expert) adopts a compact diffusion transformer (DiT) Peebles & Xie (2023) and a DINOv2 visual encoder Oquab et al. It is implemented as a k-layer cross-attention module, where the query tokens selectively attend to k intermediate layers of the VLM (e.g., k= 1 attends only to the final layer). Latent grounding via spatial prompting.To explicitly activate the spatial perception capability learned during spatial grounding pre-training, we employ spatial prompting during post-action training stage. (2025) showing that direct gradient flow between action and VLM modules may distort multimodal knowledge, we introduce a gradient decay factor within the querying transformer. 2.2 TRAININGRECIPE To leverage spatial priors for stronger embodiment-specific control in diverse scenarios, ST4VLA adopts a spatially guided two-stage training pipeline: Spatial grounding pre-training.The objective of the first stage (see Figure 2) is to establish a foundational alignment between generic visuo-linguistic understanding and the specific spatial reasoning demands of robotics, thereby priming the model for the subsequent co-adaptation of grounding and action objectives. First, we perform a preliminary study to explore the alignment between spatial grounding and action learning during training (Section 3.1). We compare three distinct training strategies using the OXE dataset for action data and a curated set of spatial grounding datasets for multimodal co-training: incorporates spatially pretrained and spatial prompt- ing during pretraining and co-training with multimodal data during post-training. Empirical experiment analysis.Figure 3 (a) and Figure 3 (b) illustrate the interaction between manipulation success (WidowX) and perception performance (on RefCOCO-g) across training steps. (a) perception performance (IoU@0.5 on RefCOCO-g); (b) manipulation performance (Average Success Rate on WidowX); (c) shows the gradient similarity of the spatial grounding and action policy objectives, when taking vanilla co-training or the proposed spatially prompting co-training. (2017), a method to quantify the alignment between the optimization dynamics of the multimodal grounding objective and the action policy objective. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our spatially guided pre-training and action post-training strategies. Furthermore, for each of the 200 tasks, we additionally collected 5 trajectories with identical object sets but randomized layouts, which were used for post-training. (2025), underwent extensive pretraining on large corpora of action data, we ensured a fair comparison by post-training our model on a large-scale dataset of 244K pick-and-place demonstrations simulations generated in Isaac-Sim following stage 2 paradigm. Even under highly challenging conditions, such as interference from visually similar distractors, novel object instances, and paraphrased instructions, ST4VLA achieves strong results through spatial pretraining and spatially guided post-training. Furthermore, in evaluations involving unseen object poses and orientations, our approach significantly surpasses the baselines π0 and GR00T N1.5, benefiting from the diverse grasp positions and trajectories introduced by co-training on large-scale simulation data. In contrast, our approach strategically emphasizes spatial grounding data and introduces a spatially guided co-training scheme with gradient alignment, coupled with a lightweight post-training phase that unlocks intrinsic reasoning in VLMs without requiring explicit outputs. We then compute the gradients of the respective losses with respect to θ for each batch, resulting in the following gradient matrices: the q projection in the self-attention module of thefinal layerof the Qwen language model, whose parameter θ∈R d is a 2048×2048 weight matrix. During training, we periodically compute PSS using the fixed probing evaluation sets (batch size = 64 for each type of data). While theVanilla VLAandVanilla Co-traini