REAL METHOD of "Relatron: Automating Relational Machine Learning over Relational Databases" (arXiv 2602.22552v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

(1) RDL does not consistently outperform DFS, with performance being highly task-dependent; (2) no single architecture domi- nates across tasks, underscoring the need for task-aware model selection; and (3) validation accuracy is an unreliable guide for architecture choice. Guided by these signals, we propose Relatron, a task embedding-based meta-selector that first chooses between RDL and DFS and then prunes the within-family search to deliver strong performance. We conduct an architecture-centric search—a grid over architecture choices with sampled hyperparameters—to build a performance bank. Automatic architecture selection.We identify factors that drive the performance gap and use them to design theRelatron, an architecture selector with strong test generalization. We introduce an RDB-task homophily metric that correlates strongly with the performance gap between DFS and RDL, further enriched with training-free affinity embeddings that capture task table size, structural affinity, and temporal dynamics. We propose a representative model design space for RDB predictive tasks, featuring promising performance, and generate a model performance bank that links model architecture configura- tions to task performance for future research. Through extensive experiments, we validate the effectiveness of our pipelines in tasks such as predicting proper architectures and joint hyperparameter-architecture search. (1) time is first- class—labels are split and conditioned on time; (2) labels are defined by time-constrained SQL over arbitrary column combinations; (3) heterogeneous column types make feature interactions richer than in text-attributed or non-attributed graphs. 3DESIGN SPACE OF MODEL ARCHITECTURES OVERRDB Architecture selection begins by giving an architecture design space. 3.2 MODEL ARCHITECTURE DESIGN SPACE Architecture choice.As shown in Table 1, to enable a fair comparison between DFS and RDL on RDB benchmarks, we construct a compact, factorized design space for each family.RDLmod- els are built from three modules: Standard training hyperparameters such as learning rate, dropout, normalization, and neighbor fanout are also tuned.DFSmethods are parameterized by three main knobs: Name Architecture design space Hyper-parameters RDL Structural feature Message passing Readout Learning rate, dropout,normalization, fanout...Labeling ID, Learnable embedding, NonePNA, HGT, Sage, RelGNNMLP, ContextGNN, Shallow DFS Aggregation function Aggregation layers Backbone Batch size, hidden dimension...Max, Min, Mode, ... (fixed)1, 2, 3 (if possible)TabPFN, LightGBM, FT-Transformer 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3.3 EMPIRICAL STUDY OF VARIOUS ARCHITECTURE DESIGNS Evaluation setup.For entity-level tasks, we sample15configurations per architecture combination (180per task). (2024), we train up to20epochs, capping each epoch at1,000steps (recommendation) or 500(entity-level), using Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with an optional exponential LR scheduler. These performance results justify architecture selection:no single architecture dominates across tasks. 4 PRINCIPLES AND AUTOMATION OF ARCHITECTURE SELECTION Building on Section 3, where neither paradigm uniformly dominates, we seek a principled way to choose architectures for an RDB task. Starting from the PK–FK graph used for training, we temporally aggregate labels to per-entity meansˆy v ∈R C, then aug- ment the graph as in Figure 3 to form self-looped metapaths; for scalability, we restrict to one-hop metapaths. Number of training rows.Among basic RDB statistics, the number of training rowsN train plays a uniquely important role. We identify thatlog(N train), representing the logarithm of training row counts, and adjusted homophily are the most significant predictors. 2.Dependence on the number of training rows.The same view clarifies why the number of training rows,N train, is a key moderator. 1.First-orderP 1:max |i−k|+|j−l|=1 |Lij −Lkl|√ (si−sk)2+(tj −tl)2 (worst finite-difference slope onΠ), de- tecting brittle checkpoints near loss cliffs. Model-free embedding requires no training and is extremely fast to compute. (2)Macro-level architecture search:Second, we check whether task embeddings can help identify the proper architecture for an RDB task. DFS winner?We then investi- gate whether task embeddings can predict which method—RDL or DFS—performs better on a novel task. Joint hyperparameter and architecture search.We evaluate our full pipeline in a joint HPO–architecture–search setting. We report results on three representative datasets—DRIVER-TOP3,DRIVER-POSITION, andUSER- CHURN—and use the remaining tasks as the performance bank; the first two have small training tables and are prone to overfitting. Unlike other methods that suffer from the undesirable “the more you train, the worse you get” phenomenon, our perfor- mance continues to improve as the number of trials increases. Then, we propose a meta-predictor based on the model performance bank and our proposed selector, Relatron, which demonstrates promising performance in both macro- and micro-level architecture search. Lemma 1(Gate-off, flip, and linear region).For alls∈Randm∈ M, (i)(gate-off) ifγ m = 0thenϕ max(s;γ m)≡0; (ii)(flip) ifγ m <0thenϕ max(s;γ m) =−ϕ max(s;|γ m|); (iii)(linear region) if|s| ≤γ m thenϕ max(s;γ m) =s. Under standard norm con- straints on these modules, classical results giveR N (Fπ)≲ √dπ/ √ Nforπ∈ {DFS,RDL}; the encoder–GNN stack strictly increases the effective dimension and parameter count, soc RDL > cDFS. Interpretation forN train.IdentifyingNwith the number of training rowsN train, Theorem 2 for- malizes the empirical trend that the DFS–RDL gap is controlled by a bias–variance trade-off: (7) Proof.Start from the layer recursion; each step distributes over incoming edges and multiplies by the layer-ℓmessageg (ℓ) k (·). (2025b) relies on a cross-table attention module that mimics DFS aggregation, but its performance cannot consistently outperform state-of-the-art GNN- based methods. One-shot NAS approaches first train a supernet and then prune it to obtain target architectures (Li & King, 2020; Guan et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2021), and Zhang et al. Specifically, we computeentity mean val,entity median val, entity mean train, andentity median train, which capture the central tendency of tar- get entities in both validation and training sets. For example, for entity mean, we first generate the following prediction, 1fkey = list(train_table.fkey