REAL METHOD of "Learning Distributions over Permutations and Rankings with Factorized Representations" (arXiv 2505.24664v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Existing methods rely on mixtures of parametric families or neural networks with expensive variational inference procedures. In this work, we propose a novel approach that leverages alternative representations for permutations, including Lehmer codes, Fisher-Yates draws, and Insertion-Vectors. These representa- tions form a bijection with the symmetric group, allowing for unconstrained learning using conventional deep learning techniques, and can represent any probability distribution over permutations. Our approach enables a trade-off between expressivity of the model family and computational requirements. In the least expressive and most computationally efficient case, our method subsumes previous families of well established probabilistic models over permutations, including Mallow’s and the Repeated Insertion Model. Experiments indicate our method significantly outperforms current approaches on the jigsaw puzzle benchmark, a common task for permutation learning. We show that our method learns non-trivial distributions even in the least expressive mode, while traditional models fail to even generate valid permutations in this setting. Daniel Severo atdsevero@meta.com Figure 1 Overview of our method unscrambling the sequence “osftre" autoregressively using one of the representations we consider in this work: These limitations have been addressed in existing literature by considering mixtures Lu and Boutilier (2014), which require expensive variational inference procedures for learning and inference. More recently, several works have proposed methods for learning arbitrary probability distributions over permutations using neural networks, in the framework of diffusion (Zhang et al., 2024) and convex relaxations (Mena et al., 2018) (see Section 2 for an overview). In this work, we develop models that can represent any probability distribution over permutations and can be trained with conventional deep learning techniques, including any-order masked language modelling (MLM) (Uria et al., 2016; Larochelle and Murray, 2011), and autoregressive next-token-prediction (AR or NTP) (Shannon, 1948). We leverage alternative representations for permutations (beyond the usual inline notation) that form a bijection with the symmetric group, allowing for unconstrained learning. To trade off compute and expressivity, MLMs have the capability of sampling multiple permutation elements independently with one forward pass through the neural network. Aforementioned representations always produce valid permutations at inference time for any amount of compute spent, even in the fully-factorized case when all tokens are unmasked in a single forward-pass. In Theorem 4.3 we establish a relationship between a permutation’s inverse, and its Lehmer and Insertion-Vector representations, which allows us to develop a fast decoding algorithm for Insertion-Vectors that can be applied in batch, significantly improving inference time compute. Our methods establishes new state-of-the-art results on the common benchmark of solving jigsaw puzzles (Mena et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2024), significantly outperforming previous diffusion and convex-relaxation based approaches. At each step, the current element of the reference is inserted immediately to the left ofVi, and values to the right are shifted right one position to accommodate. One common strategy is to relax the discrete problem into continuous space—either by relaxing permutation matrices (Grover et al., 2019; Cuturi et al., 2019) or by using differentiable swapping methods (Petersen et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2024). (2020), but only in the AR context and with a different architecture than considered in this work. (2024) joined the concepts of discrete space diffusion and differentiable shuffling methods to propose an expressive generative method dubbed SymmetricDiffusers, SymDiff for short. Fisher-Yates Shuffle (Fisher and Yates, 1953).The Fisher-Yates Shuffle is an algorithm commonly used to generate uniformly distributed permutations. At each step, the element at the current index is swapped with a randomly selected element to the right, and aftern steps is guaranteed to produce a uniformly distributed permutation if the initial sequence is a valid permutation. The index sampled at each step,F Yi, are referred to as the “draws”. During the Fisher-Yates shuffle it possible to sample 0, resulting in no swap (see a “pass” step in Figure 2 for an example). If sampling is restricted such that F Yi > 0, then the procedure is guaranteed to produce a cyclic permutation and is known as Sattolo’s Algorithm (Sattolo, 1986). An algorithm to do so is provided by Kunze et al. Code to run Fisher-Yates and Sattolo’s algorithm is given in Appendix D.2. 4 Learning Factorized Distributions over Permutations This section discusses the main methodological contribution of this work. MLMs can trade off compute and expressivity by sampling multiple permutation elements with one network function evaluation (or forward pass). In that case, simultaneously sampled elements are conditionally independent, which corresponds to an effective loss in modeling capacity. We propose learning in the 3 alternative representations discussed in Section 3: For Lehmer and Fisher-Yates representations there exist efficient algorithms to convert from (encode) and to (decode) inline, but it is not obvious how to do so for insertion-vectors. The following theorem allows for an efficient batched algorithm for encoding and decoding, by leveraging known algorithms for Lehmer codes (see Appendix D.1). For AR, we modify the architecture to add an additional step that attends to the input sequence as well as the tensor (see Appendix D.4). Our method significantly outperforms previous diffusion and convex-relaxation baselines, with all representa- tions and losses. All cyclic permutations of lengthn are generated with Sattolo’s algorithm (Sattolo, 1986), and a random set of 20% are taken as the training set, resulting in a train set size of(n − 1)!/5. SymDiff (Zhang et al., 2024) and Gumbel-Sinkhorn (Mena et al., 2018) significantly under-perform as puzzle size increases, while our methods do not. We first filter to keep only movies rated by at least1, 000 users, and then randomly sample1, 000 movies from the remaining. The user ratings are then used to compute the true ranking (i.e., labels), with ties broken randomly. We train with MLM and AR to predict the labels conditioned on the prefix, and the labels ge