REAL METHOD of "VoxPrivacy: A Benchmark for Evaluating Interactional Privacy of Speech Language Models" (arXiv 2601.19956v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this gap, we introduceVoxPrivacy, the first benchmark designed to evaluate interactional privacy in SLMs. by fine-tuning on a new 4,000-hour training set, we improve the model’s privacy-preserving capabilities while achieving fair robustness. To support future work, we are releasing the V oxPrivacy benchmark, the large-scale training set, and the fine-tuned model to help the development of safer and more context-aware SLMs1. This signature enables SLMs to differentiate between users, a vital step toward intelligent and personalized conversational interactions. They test if the model understands the speaker dynamics of the conversation, but not the crucial subsequent step: To address this critical gap, we introduce V oxPrivacy, the first benchmark designed to systematically evaluate the ability of SLMs to maintain interactional privacy in multi-user spoken dialogues. To encourage progress, we built a 4000-hour training set and fine-tuned a model to show a path forward. • We design and release V oxPrivacy, the first benchmark for interactional privacy in multi-speaker SLM dialogues. It features a novel three-tiered task structure to measure capabilities ranging from simple instruction-following to autonomous inference, and is accompanied by a full suite of resources including a 32-hour benchmark set, a small 18-speaker human-recorded validation subset that confirms synthetic–real alignment, a 4000-hour training set, and a fine-tuned model. While modular, these systems suffer from error propagation and, critically, the loss of rich paralinguistic information like emotion and vocal timbre during the text conversion process. Prominent models like Gemini-2.5-Pro (Comanici et al., 2025), Kimi- Audio (Ding et al., 2025), and Step-Audio2 (Wu et al., 2025) can process raw audio, allowing them to retain the full context of the spoken input and generate more natural and expressive replies. They test whether the model understands the speaker dynamics of the conversation, but not the crucial subsequent step: Stages 1–2 generate and refine secret statements; Stage 3 structures them into three difficulty tiers; and Stage 4 assigns speakers and synthesizes the final audio. 3.1 TASKDEFINITION To systematically evaluate the interactional privacy capabilities of SLMs, a benchmark should assess their handling of secret content, speaker identity, and privacy constraints (Mireshghallah et al., 2024a). Building on this principle, we design three tasks of increasing difficulty to measure the capability of SLMs to protect interactional privacy. Given a more nuanced instruction like“Let’s keep this between us”, the model must leverage the querier’s voice as a biometric key, granting access exclusively to the original speaker while denying all others. The model must then automatically enforce a speaker-conditioned access policy, disclosing the information only to the verified owner. 3.2.2 DATAPREPROCESSING The raw statements from the generation stage then enter a multi-stage preprocessing pipeline to ensure quality. First, we apply an automated similarity filter using difflib to remove near-duplicate entries and prevent data contamination. The prompts used for the refinement step are documented in Appendix A.1. 3.2.3 SYNTHETICDATAGENERATION Dialogue Assembly.The validated text statements are then assembled into structured, multi-turn dialogues designed for our benchmark tasks. After assigning these speaker identities to the dialogue roles, every synthesized sample undergoes a final quality assurance check. 3.3 DATASETSTATISTICS The final V oxPrivacy benchmark consists of 7,107 utterances, totaling 32.86 hours of audio evenly balanced between English and Chinese. 4 EXPERIMENTS ANDRESULTS 4.1TRAINING SET To fine-tune our model for the V oxPrivacy tasks, we constructed a dedicated training set. While the core data generation and cleaning methods are identical to those used for the benchmark set, the training data is significantly expanded in scale and variety. To better prepare the model for varied conversational flows, the training set also includes a mix of both 2-round and 3-round dialogue formats. Finally, to explore a constructive path toward interactional privacy, we fine-tune Kimi-Audio on our proposed training set. Guided by structured prompts, the judge first identifies Invalid Responses (IR)—such as those that are off-topic, merely repeat the user’s question, or provide factually incorrect information—to measure the model’s basic conversational reliability. The judge then assesses privacy compliance by determining if the response discloses a secret. For the conditional disclosure tasks (Tier 2 and 3), we define correctly withholding a secret as a True Positive (TP), allowing us to calculate Precision, Recall, and F1-Score to provide a more nuanced measure of a model’s privacy-preserving capabilities. 4.4 EXPERIMENTALSETUP Configuration for Model TrainingWe fine-tune the Kimi-Audio model by simultaneously up- dating its Whisper-large-v3 (Radford et al., 2023) audio encoder and adaptor module. The model is optimized using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-5 and trained for one epoch. The training is conducted on 8 A800 GPUs with a per-device batch size of 32. Inference Setting of LLM JudgeFor our objective evaluation, we employ both Deepseek-V3 (Liu et al., 2024) and Gemini-2.5-Pro as LLM judges. randomness, we perform inference three times for each generated response and adopt the majority vote as the final judgment. In Tier 3, it must first infer that the information is sensitive from its content alone (e.g. First, using our ASR front-end, word/character error rates for Chinese are roughly 1.5–2× higher than for English, introducing additional noise before the reasoning stage. We first validate that the observed failures persist on real human speech. Then we diagnose the root cause of model failures, 7 Preprint. Finally, we verify that our fine-tuning method adds the new privacy skill without degrading the model’s other core capabilities. We recruited 18 bilingual volunteers to record a representative subset of our scripts, resulting in 586 authentic utterances (288 English, 298 Chinese). To distinguish between these possibilities, our first step is to test the models’ foundational conversational skills in isolation. This pattern may reflect a training paradigm that is heavily weighted towards single-speaker interactions, suggesting a need to reconsider the data and methods 