REAL METHOD of "ImageRAG: Dynamic Image Retrieval for Reference-Guided Image Generation" (arXiv 2502.09411v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Given a text prompt, our method,ImageRAG, dynamically retrieves relevant images and provides them to a text-to-image model as references (Retrieved Ref.).ImageRAGworks with different models, e.g. To address this challenge, we explore the usage of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) for image generation, and introduceImageRAG, a training-free method for rare concept generation. Prior approaches that use retrieved images require training models specifically for retrieval-based generation. We demonstrate our approach is highly adaptable through evaluation over different backbones, including models trained to receive image inputs and models augmented with a post-training image-prompt adapter. These large models require great amounts of training data, substantial training durations, and extensive computational resources. retrieval.Although some generative models, such as SDXL, use CLIP as a text encoder, they sometimes fail to generate concepts (‘Generation’ column) that are retrieved successfully using CLIP (‘Retrieval’ column).Right: By applying our method to retrieve and utilize relevant references (‘+Reference’ column), the base models can generate appropriate images (‘ImageRAG’ column). Most approaches, however, require training or specialized optimization techniques for each new concept. RAG dynamically retrieves the most relevant information from external data sources given a query, and supplies it to an LLM as context input, enabling contextually accurate and task-specific responses. Investigating this idea for images, we note that previous works employing image retrieval for better image generation (Chen et al., 2022; Sheynin et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024), train models specifically for the task, hindering wide applicability. A recent work (Lyu et al., 2025) requires training of a specific retrieval module per base generative model. In contrast, we propose ImageRAG, a method that dynamically retrieves and provides images as references to pretrained models, to enhance their generation capabilities, and does not require any additional training. Therefore, we need to decide which images to use as context, how to retrieve them, and how to use the retrieved images, to successfully generate a required prompt. In this work, we address these questions by offering a novel method that dynamically identifies relevant and useful examples given a prompt, and uses them as references to guide the model toward 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 generating the required result. To understand what the challenging concepts are, we propose a novel method that applies a guided multimodal chain-of-thought (CoT) process using a VLM. By encouraging step-by-step reasoning, CoT (Wei et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2023) helps VLMs reach more reliable and consistent conclusions by decomposing complex tasks into explicit intermediate steps that reduce errors. Specifically, we first generate an initial image and then iteratively prompt a VLM to assess the alignment between the image and prompt, identify missing visual components, and suggest complementary concepts. We then use these concepts to retrieve reference images that guide subsequent generation. (2020) is a method for improving the generation abilities of a pretrained model without additional training, by dynamically retrieving and supplying information as context through text prompts. Some previous work used nearest-neighbor image retrieval to improve image generation (Sheynin et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Lyu et al., 2025) or for editing-guidance (Hu et al., 2024; Sanguigni et al., 2025), however they either train models specifically for retrieval-aided generation or require a retrieval-module training per-model. Unlike them, our method leverages pretrained models and does not require additional training. Unlike our method, they retrieve all the concepts in a prompt, ignoring prior knowledge of the model. To mitigate this challenge, recent works train image-encoders that allow prompting existing pretrained generative models with images (Ye et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a). Then, using a guided CoT process, we generate retrieval-captions <cj>, retrieve images from an external database for each caption <ij>, and use them as references to the model for better generation.Bottom: To retrieve images matching a given caption, we compare the caption to all the images in the retrieval-dataset using a text-image similarity metric and retrieve the most similar images. Next, following a common retrieval workflow, in which first image candidates are being retrieved using pre-computed embeddings, and then the retrieved candidates are being re-ranked using a different, often more expensive but accurate, method (Vendrow et al., 2024), we additionally experimented with some re-ranking methods of reference candidates. After relevant images are retrieved, we can use image conditioning methods to condition T2I models using our reference images by augmenting the input prompt to contain the retrieved im- ages as examples. 4), demonstrating our method is model- and conditioning method-agnostic. In most experiments, we used GPT as our VLM and CLIP as our retrieval method, as they performed best overall, and a 350K images subset of LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022) as our retrieval-dataset for generic usage. Users preference percentage of our method compared to other methods in terms of text alignment, visual quality, and overall preference. Comparative studies:1) comparing OmniGen, SDXL, and FLUX with and without our method, and 2) comparing our results to retrieval-based models trained for the task of image generation using retrieved images: Results of our method using different similarity metrics for image retrieval. Retrieval method:performance is tied to the quality of the retriever. Moreover, unlike pre-trained models, which encode all knowledge in their weights, our method uses an external dataset. The time and resources required to run our method depend on the used baseline model and the used retrieval-dataset. If the retrieval data does not contain relevant examples, our method cannot help. Our method relies on the quality of the retrieval method. C RETRIEVAL-CAPTIONGENERATIONPROMPTS Full prompts used for querying GPT in the retrieval-caption generation part of our method: In most cases, using our suggested step-by-step method yields better results than retrieving images directly from the given prompt 