REAL METHOD of "Towards a Certificate of Trust: Task-Aware OOD Detection for Scientific AI" (arXiv 2509.25080v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose a new OOD detection method based on estimating joint likelihoods using a score-based diffusion model. While the ultimate goal of this research direction is to furnish end-users with reliable "certificates" of prediction quality, the main contribution of the present paper is to propose the following important steps towards this objective, • We develop and empirically validate a novel approach integratinganyunderlying regression modelΨwith a score-based diffusion model for OOD detection. Task-Aware OOD Detection for Scientific AI 2 Related Work A first approach to OOD detection, with applications to image classification, directly leverages latent features from the trained networks including outputs of the final or earlier layers. Methods like MC-Dropout [12] and Rate-In [44] use dropout at train and test time to generate stochastic forward passes that approximate Bayesian inference. Task-Aware OOD Detection for Scientific AI 3 Methodology A generic regression task consists in minimizing over parametersφ, a loss of the form, L= ˆ X ×Y ℓ(y,Ψ φ(x))p(x, y)dx dy,(3.1) whereΨ φ is a model of the operatorΨwhich defines the ground truth,ℓ is the loss function andp(x, y)is the (ground truth) training distribution. Given an unseen inputx⋆ with corresponding ground-truth outputy⋆, our goal is to determine a quantity c(x⋆), to be used as acertificate, which correlates with the lossℓ(y⋆, Ψφ(x⋆)). To compute it, we train the denoiserDθ of our score-based diffusion model on the available data pairs(xn, yn), n = 1, . Given any new inputx⋆, we then first generate the predictionΨφ(x⋆)using the regression model, and then we estimate the joint log-likelihoodp(x⋆, ypred)by numerically solving the associated probability flow ODE(3.4), with its score function being estimated by the trained DenoiserDθ. To this end, we first take a small number ofdecision samplesfrom the training distribution and compute themedianof the corresponding certificate values, denoting it asle, along with their standard deviation,σe. Finally, our proposed overall algorithm for reliability certification in terms of ID/OOD detection is summarized in Algorithm 1. Task-Aware OOD Detection for Scientific AI Once the modelΨis trained on the training set X = {u0,n,Ψ(u 0,n)}N n=1, we then test its performance on the test distribution. Algorithm 1OOD Detection with Diffusion Certificates 1:Train task modelΨ φ on(x, y)and denoiser (diffusion) modelD θ onp(x, y) 2:Define certificatec θ(x,Ψ φ(x))via probability-flow ODE (e.g. likelihood as in (3.4)) 3:From training samples, compute(error, cθ)and set ID/OOD boundary 4:fortest samplexdo 5:y pred ←Ψ φ(x) 6:c←c θ(x, ypred) 7:ifc≥c boundary then 8:classify as ID 9:else 10:classify as OOD 11:end if 12:end for We perform ID/OOD classification as described in Section 3. To better understand the sensitivity of our approach, we performed two ablation studies on the sensitivity to the diffusion model training and number of samples used to determine ID/CD/OOD ranges. Sensitivity to the Diffusion Model:The first ablation examines the extent to which the diffusion model needs to be trained to be effective for OOD detection, with further details in SI B.1.2. As the model is trained for more epochs, the estimated likelihood becomes increasingly aligned with the prediction error, with the final model (trained for 500 epochs) showing a pronounced correlation between the two. We also observe that the average estimated log-likelihood over both the training and test distributions increases steadily throughout training, exhibiting a rapid transition during training (cp. Regression Model Architecture:In our final ablation, we evaluate the proposed framework using various regression architectures. A time-conditioned regression model is trained to forecast up to 60h (15 steps) into the future, and evaluated on 12h predictions (3 steps). The classifier is trained using a conventionalsoftmax-based loss function, maximizing the log-probability corresponding to the true labely. We designate one class as out-of-distribution (OOD), which is underrepresented in the training set. For each in-distribution class, we select approximately 4.5K training samples, with slight variations in the exact number for each class. Our method follows a similar strategy as for classification, with one key distinction: We train our segmentation model using brain scans with HGG tumors, from which we select 190 for training, 10 for validation, and 10 for testing. For the Wave Equation experiment, we additionally compared our method against two Bayesian-style approaches where the predicted epistemic uncertainty is used for OOD detection, namely MC-Dropout [12] and Rate-In [44], both of which use dropout during training and inference to enable stochastic forward passes (i.e., approximate Bayesian inference). In some cases, the objective is to assess the model’s generalization ability within its own training distribution. We proposed a novel, task-aware OOD detection method tailored for regression tasks. We further assume that there exists a parameterφ∗, such that the resulting minimized loss is given by, ˆ X ×Y ℓ(y,Ψ φ∗(x))p(x, y)dx dy≤ε <<1.(A.2) Hence, we assume that the generalization error of the trained modelΨ∗ = Ψφ∗ is very small. Illustrate contributions to joint likelihood In the following, we consider simple toy problems, where a simple multilayer-perceptron (MLP) is trained to regress on functions in 1d. Given a function f that we seek to approximate, we construct our training inputs by first selecting the number of positive samples,N+, and drawing them fromN (1, 0.5). Figure 4 presents the target functions, training samples, prediction errors, and overall performance of the trained MLPs. For each point on the graphs,10 different models are trained,each time with new training set, the meanL2 error is calculated for each model, and the median of these 10 errors is reported. Note that for each point on the graphs, we trained 10 different models and used the same procedure as above to compute the errors. For each point on the graphs,10 different models are trained, each time with new training set, the meanL2 error is calculated for each model, and the median of these 10 errors is reported. Evolution of the median estimated joint log-likelihood on the training distribution (red) and the EMA validation loss (blue) over the course of training. For theNS-PwCdataset, training uses 5K trajectories of length 8 (the first 8 snapshots)