REAL METHOD of "EAMET: ROBUST MASSIVE MODEL EDITING VIA EMBEDDING ALIGNMENT OPTIMIZATION" (arXiv 2505.11876v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

ROBUSTMASSIVEMODELEDITING VIAEMBEDDINGALIGNMENTOPTIMIZATION Yanbo Dai, Zhenlan Ji, Zongjie Li∗, Shuai Wang∗ Department of Computer Science and Engineering The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology {ydai851, zjiae, zligo, shuaiw}@cse.ust.hk ABSTRACT Model editing techniques are essential for efficiently updating knowledge in large language models (LLMs). To address this, we propose EAMET (Embedding Alignment Model Editing in Transformers), which addresses this issue by aligning the space of key and residual embeddings. Extensive ex- periments across six LLMs and three datasets demonstrate that EAMET con- sistently outperforms existing methods, achieving about 90% editing efficacy when editing 10k facts. 1 INTRODUCTION Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly employed as search engines and chatbots, as they excel at retrieving knowledge to answer user queries (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2024a; Bi et al., 2024). However, they are prone to spreading misinformation about frequently updated topics due to outdated training data (Vykopal et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2024). To address this issue, retraining or fine-tuning models for partial knowledge updates is proposed (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2025), albeit with prohibitively expensive overhead. In contrast, recent advances in locate-then-edit model editing (ME) techniques (Meng et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024) enable massive editing of thousands of factual associations concurrently at minimal data and computational cost, thereby rendering real-time knowledge updates feasible. keymemoryJeep Commander is created by JeepEDIT Honda keymemoryCurrent Methods EAMET (ours) argmax!𝑃"!(𝑜|(𝑠#,𝑟𝑒𝑙#))=𝑜# [PREFIX] Sentence{Sentences|𝑠#=Jeep Commander} Effectiveness Robustness 𝑃"!𝑜#𝑠#,𝑟𝑒𝑙#>𝑃"!(𝑜$|(𝑠#,𝑟𝑒𝑙#)) Current MethodsEAMET Figure 1: Illustration of current methods and our proposed EAMET in evaluating massive editing. To analyze the limitations of existing methods, we first identify“embedding misalignment”, which reflects the structural inconsistency between key and residual embedding spaces, as a primary factor underlying the decline in both effectiveness and robustness during massive editing. MEMIT (Meng et al., 2023) scales to edit 10,000 facts concurrently, and PMET (Li et al., 2025) further improves performance by 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 incorporating attention layers when updating the parameters of the FFNs. These stored facts could be edited by modifying the MLP layers within FFN modules, based on the assumption that knowledge is stored in them in the form of key-value pairs (Geva et al., 2021; 2022). The objective in Equation (1) can then be optimized by solving the normal equations (Meng et al., 2023): (2) The update should ensure lossless reconstruction for each individual fact, formulated as ∆ki =r i, where ∆ is computed while considering all target facts. Specifically, we quantify the degree to which Equation (7) is established by analyzing the reconstruction loss ei = ∆ki −r i for each knowledge item. LKL(i) =KL  P (i) r ∥ ¯P (i) k  .(12) Since KL divergence emphasizes distributional differences, we further strengthen the alignment by selecting the top M cosine similarities {P (i,j) k } from P (i) k , and computing the mean squared error (MSE) loss between the corresponding residual similarities{P (i,j) r }: To make the optimization procedure explicit, we describe each component of the objective in Equation (14). For each fact i, let hL i denote the hidden state at layer L produced by the templated prompt tp(si, reli). We justify our design of combining KL loss and MSE loss in Section F.5. We propose to evaluate the editing performance of ME techniques by requiring the edited models to strictly examine whether explicit target objects are retrieved, as demonstrated in Figure 1. 7 CONCLUSION In this paper, we propose EAMET, a novel model editing method that enables stronger and more robust massive editing across various models and datasets. We first identify that the failures of existing methods in both effectiveness and robustness of massive editing stem from misalignment between the space of key and residual embeddings. It first identifies that factual knowledge is primarily stored in mid-layer feed-forward modules, thereby demonstrating the feasibility of editing model parameters to update internal knowledge. The method then updates these weights to encode specific factual associations. Unlike prior approaches that treat transformer layer (TL) hidden states as direct inputs of the feed-forward network (FFN), PMET recognizes that these hidden states also encompass information from multi-head self-attention (MHSA) and residual connections. D.2.1 COUNTERFACTMETRICS Given an LLM fθ, a knowledge fact tuple (subject si, relation ri), a target output oi and the original outputo c i, we define the following metrics: D.2.2 WIKI-RECENTMETRICS Given a LLM fθ, a knowledge fact tuple (si, ri), a target output oi and the original output oc i, we define the following metrics: D.2.3 ZSRE METRICS Given a LLM fθ, a knowledge fact tuple (si, ri), a target output oi and the original output oc i, we define the following metrics: Layers Counterfact ZsRE Eff.↑Gen.↑Spe.↑Flu.↑ Eff.↑Gen.↑Spe.↑ 3, 4 89.09 61.21 72.19 519.23 89.47 81.34 15.70 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 77.58 36.83 73.43 516.63 87.14 76.91 15.92 This effect arises because, as the edited layer becomes deeper, the similarity between key embeddings of different knowledge items increases. As shown in Figure 7, the average similarity across layers of LLaMA2-7B grows with layer depth. When the last edited layer is 8, the average similarity is nearly twice that of layer 4. E ALGORITHMICDESCRIPTION OFEAMET In this section, we present a detailed description of the EAMET algorithm in Algorithm 1. Before optimizing residual embeddings, we first compute the key embeddings for each target edit (Line 7). We then compute pairwise cosine similarities among key embeddings to obtainP k (Line 9). We update MLP modules sequentially across layers l∈ R, as earlier edits affect subsequent representations. For each candidate layer, we compute key embeddings kl i for all edits (Line 24) and residual embeddings rl i, distributing them proportionally across layers (Line 25). Furthermore, we explore its integration with sequential editing, showing that embedding alignment enables larger batch sizes per step and thus reduces the number of ste