REAL METHOD of "Trained on Tokens, Calibrated on Concepts: The Emergence of Semantic Calibration in LLMs" (arXiv 2511.04869v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

The Emergence of Semantic Calibration in LLMs Preetum Nakkiran,Arwen Bradley,Adam Goliński,Eugene Ndiaye,Michael Kirchhof,Sinead Williamson Apple LargeLanguageModels(LLMs)oftenlackmeaningfulconfidenceestimatesfortheiroutputs.WhilebaseLLMsareknown toexhibitnext-tokencalibration,itremainsunclearwhethertheycanassessconfidenceintheactualmeaningoftheir responsesbeyondthetokenlevel.Wefindthat,whenusingacertainsampling-basednotionofsemanticcalibration, baseLLMsareremarkablywell-calibrated:theycanmeaningfullyassessconfidenceinopen-domainquestion-answering tasks,despitenotbeingexplicitlytrainedtodoso.Ourmaintheoreticalcontributionestablishesamechanismforwhyse- manticcalibrationemergesasabyproductofnext-tokenprediction,leveragingarecentconnectionbetweencalibration andlocallossoptimality.Thetheoryreliesonageneraldefinitionof“B-calibration,”whichisanotionofcalibrationpa- rameterizedbyachoiceofequivalenceclasses(semanticorotherwise).Thistheoreticalmechanismleadstoatestable prediction:baseLLMswillbesemanticallycalibratedwhentheycaneasilypredicttheirowndistributionoversemantic answerclassesbeforegeneratingaresponse.Westatethreeimplicationsofthisprediction,whichwevalidatethrough experiments:(1)BaseLLMsaresemanticallycalibratedacrossquestion-answeringtasks,(2)RLinstruction-tuningsys- tematicallybreaksthiscalibration,and(3)chain-of-thoughtreasoningbreakscalibration.Toourknowledge,ourwork providesthefirstprincipledexplanationofwhenandwhysemanticcalibrationemergesinLLMs. There is strong empirical and theoretical evidence that base LLMs, which are only pre-trained with the maximum likelihood loss, are typicallynext-token-calibrated(OpenAI, 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Desai & Durrett, 2020). the test distribution (math, trivia, etc.), the post-training procedure (RLHF, DPO, RLVR, none, etc.), the inference-time procedure (few-shot examples, chain-of-thought (CoT), best-of-K, etc.), the model size, the model architecture, the sampling temperature, etc. A priori, there is no reason to expectemergence1 of any of these forms of semantic calibration as a byproduct of standard pre-training with the maximum likelihood loss. Then, an obvious way to improve the LLM’s test loss is: We argue that base LLMs, trained to minimize cross-entropy loss, should not leave such “easy wins” on the table, and thus should be well-calibrated. Thus to implement such a loss-improving perturbation during pretraining, the LLM must implicitly “know” its semantic confidence for a given question even before generatingitsanswer—inordertoknowwhattypeofupweighting/downweightingofanswerstringsisrequired. There are three main steps in the conjecture, with different degrees of evidence for each step. For the first step, we have a fully rigorous proof. (C) (D):The first step of our argument, described in more detail in Sec. We say an LLM is locally-loss-optimal if its test loss cannot be improved by post-processing its output distribution via any function in some given set of perturbation functions (formally, Definition 5). we assume that base LLMs are nearly locally-loss-optimal on their pretraining distribution, w.r.t. Błasioketal.(2024, Theorem1.2)offerspartialtheoreticaljustification for this claim, by proving that, intuitively, if small models can represent a set of perturbations, then ERM over a family of slightly larger models yields local loss optimality w.r.t. easily-learnable) perturbation could have improved the test loss, the LLM would have learned it during training.4 We agree with Błasiok et al. we show that if the LLM “knows” its own induced distribution overB-classes at each intermediate point during 4Technically, we need local-loss-optimality not only for the overall pretraining distribution, but also for each evaluation distribution individually (TriviaQA, GSM8k, etc), since we are evaluating calibration on individual distributions. We will however assume that the latter holds (which is plausible if each evaluation distribution is a reasonably-sized sub-distribution of the pretraining distribution on which local-loss-optimality holds). 3.2B-calibration and local loss optimality We now setup and establish the equivalence between calibration and local loss optimality (Thm. We consider the sequence-level cross-entropy loss, which decomposes into the standard autoregressive next-token log-loss: Definition 5(W-local loss optimality).We say that modelpθ isW-locally-loss-optimalon distributionDif ∀w∈ W: Definition 6(Semantic Perturbation Function Classes).Given an arbitrary collapsing functionBx(z)∈[K], we define the classWB of perturbation functionswτ (x, px)∈R |V N | as follows. Claim 11(Main, heuristic).Let(x, y)∼ Dbe a distribution on question-answer pairs, letB:V∗ ×V N →[K] be a collapsing function, and letpθ(z|x)be an autoregressive language model trained onDwith cross-entropy loss. Corollary 14(Main, heuristic).LLMs trained autoregressively with cross-entropy loss will be semantically calibrated on in-distribution data if: RL post-training can break calibration.We only theoretically predict calibration in models trained autoregressively with cross-entropy loss, that is, standard pretraining or SFT. (Cross-entropy loss is required to connect calibration with local-loss-optimality in Thm. 7.) We have no reason to expect calibration in models trained in other ways, including Instruct models post-trained with RLHF, DPO, or RLVR – although our theory does not preclude it. For each question evaluated, we construct the appropriate5-shot prompt, sampleM= 50 responses from the LLM at temperature1, and then apply the semantic collapsing function (described below) to each response. a base model (Mistral-7B-v0.1), a version of it post-trained via instruction supervised finetuning (SFT, zephyr-7b-sft-full) (Tunstall et al., 2023), and a version post-trained via both SFT and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO, zephyr-7b-dpo-full) (Rafailov et al., 2024). The DPO model (not trained with a proper loss) is significantly miscalibrated, while the SFT-only model and the base model (both trained with proper losses) are better calibrated. when training LLMs, practitioners monitor the test/validation loss closely, and stop training before the test loss overfits (increases). On the other hand, when training classifiers, practitioners care about the testclassification error, and often continue training even as testlossincreases. test loss (and thus calibrated), but trained classifiers might have high test loss (and thus be miscalibrated). 6 Conc