REAL METHOD of "An Orthogonal Learner for Individualized Outcomes in Markov Decision Processes" (arXiv 2509.26429v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Existing methods that break the curse of the horizon typically lack strong theoretical guarantees such as orthogo- nality and quasi-oracle efficiency. (1) doubly robust (i.e., valid inference under the misspecification of one of the models), (2) Neyman-orthogonal (i.e., insensitive to first-order estimation errors in the nuisance functions), and (3) achieves quasi-oracle efficiency (i.e., behaves asymptotically as if the ground-truth nuisance functions were known). However, comparatively little attention has been given to developing methods in a principled way with theoretical guarantees such as orthogonality or quasi-oracle efficiency. For this, we first derive identifiability results and show that several of the existing baselines correspond to naïve plug-in learners, which are known to be biased. As a remedy, we next derive the efficient influence function of the training loss and use it to construct a debiased second-stage loss that is Neyman-orthogonal. (1) it isdoubly robust, which enables valid inference even under model misspecification; (2) it isNeyman-orthogonal, which makes it in- sensitive to first-order estimation errors in the nuisance functions; and (3) it achievesquasi-oracle efficiency, meaning it attains the same asymptotic performance as if the ground-truth nuisance func- tions were known. •New method.We propose thefirstmeta-learner forQ-function estimation that is simulatenously (i)doubly robust, (ii)Neyman-orthogonal, and quasi-oracle efficient. Importantly, quasi-oracle efficiency of our method guarantees convergence at the same rate as if oracle nuisance functions were known. •Empirical performance.The primary objective of our numerical experiments is tovalidate our theoretical results. (1) We review theoretical foundations from causal inference and orthogonal statistical learning to motivate our method, and (2) discuss prior work on off-policy Q-function estimation in MDPs. The latter defines our problem setup, while the former shares parallels in terms of the overall methodological approach to formalize causal quantities. Off-policyQ-function evaluation:Several methods have been developed for estimatingQ-function from MDPs in off-policy settings, that is, using observational data (e.g. From our causal inference perspective, we later obtain new theoretical insights to understand the failing modes of existing methods. In particular, we show that several state-of-the-art methods suffer from so-called plug-in bias (Kennedy, 2022) and potential instability under model misspecification. As a remedy, we first reframe off-policyQ-function evaluation through the lens of causal inference and then develop a new meta-learner called DRQ-learner. 2Many of these works focus on off-policy evaluation (and thus targetscalar averageoutcomes), where methods forQ-function evaluation are often a necessary first step (e.g., Shi et al. Key quantities:Given anobservationaldataset from a behavioral policyD πb ∼π b, we are then interested in estimating outcomes under a different evaluation policyπ e. 3.1 CAUSAL INTERPRETATION Objective:Given anobservationaldataset from a behavioral policyD πb ∼π b, we are then inter- ested in estimating outcomes under a different evaluation policyπ e. 4 AROADMAP TO ORTHOGONAL LEARNING To derive our method for estimatingQ πe from observational dataD πb, we proceed in three steps: 2 We then sketch out the idea behind design- ing two-stage meta-learners based on Neyman-orthogonal losses (Section 4.2). 1 In thefirst stage, the nuisances 5For ease of exposition, we adopt the nomenclature for naming different methods based on causal inference literature, but later state the corresponding names of the benchmarks in the literature. 2 In thesecond stage, the targetgwith true valueg ∗ is estimated by empirical risk minimization (ERM) over a riskLvia ˆg= arg min g∈G L(ˆη, g).(11) Here, one seeks a learner (second-stage loss) with small error despite learningˆgwith the estimated nuisanceˆηcarrying first-stage estimation error. A common feature for the second-stage loss is to employNeyman-orthogonal loss functions(Cher- nozhukov et al., 2018), which (in population) satisfy the property DηDgL(g∗, η)[ˆg−g,ˆη−η] = 0,(12) whereD g andD η are directional (Gateaux) derivatives in function space (Foster & Syrgkanis, 2019). Informally, orthogonality means the gradient of the lossD gL(i.e., the estimating function, or also known as thescore) is insensitive to small perturbations in the nuisances around their oracle value η, such as those arising from nuisance estimation error.7 5 OURDRQ-LEARNER We proceed in three steps: # Afterward, we derive the lossL 3 πe(η, g)with the debiasing procedure (and some algebraic manip- ulations). Algorithm 1Our DRQ-learner forQ πe Input:Observed datasetD πb , classG Output:Doubly Robust estimator ˆQDR πe 1:// First stage (nuisance estimation) 2:ˆπb(a, s)← ˆPb(A=a|S=s) 3:ˆwe/b(s′, s, a)← P∞ t=1 ˆPe(St =s′ |S0 =s,A0 =a) ˆPb (s′ ) 4: (2) The aim of the second stage estimation is to refine the first stage estimate ˆQ1 πe with a loss designed to bring favorable theoretical properties to the second stage refinement. Put differently,we construct a meta-learner that in the first stage accepts any off-policyQ πe estimation method and subsequently refines it. Further, our experiments show our method successfully incorporates the density ratio nuisance without degrading performance in the low overlap scenario (see Fig. Our method is highly effective and performs best for many settings, especially with low overlap11. To promote reliable decision-making, we focus on identifiability results that transparently state the boundary conditions of our method and thus ensure when our method can be safely used. Potential benefits and risks:Our method aims to enhance safe and effective individualized decision- making by providing more statistically reliableQ-function estimates even under model misspeci- fication and low-overlap conditions. We therefore emphasize that a successful application of our method requires domain expertise to ensure causal assumptions such as unconfoundedness and positivity, which are necessary for identifiability. Societal and fairness considerations:While our method is model-agnostic and does not impose fairness constraints by design, it can be combined with fairness-aware modeling or post-hoc policy adjustment techniques. Off-policyQ-function evaluation:Methods targeting the off-policyQ-function from MDPs, as is our goal, are ofte