REAL METHOD of "On the Interpolation Effect of Score Smoothing in Diffusion Models" (arXiv 2502.19499v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Fo- cusing mainly on settings where the training set lies uniformly in a one-dimensional subspace, we elucidate the interplay between score smoothing and the denoising dynamics with analytical solutions and numerical experiments, demonstrating how smoothing the score function can cause the denoised data samples to interpolate the training set along the subspace. After being trained on datasets of actual images or molecular configurations, for instance, such models can transform noise samples into high-quality images or chemically-plausible molecules that do not belong to the training set, indicating an exciting capability of such models to generalize beyond what they have seen and, in a sense, be creative. Then, we show quantitatively how a smoothed ESF leads the denoising dynamics to generate samples that interpolate the training data along the data subspace, which can be considered a simplest form of meaningful creativity. 1 arXiv:2502.19499v4 [cs.LG] 17 Jul 2026 with uniformly-spaced training data and prove the result by analyzing a non-parametric variational problem involving the score matching loss and a non-smoothness penalty known as equivalent to NN regularization; 2. In particular, when the training data lie in a one-dimensional (1-D) subspace, the denoising dynamics is able to recover the underlying subspace without collapsing onto the training set. Through numerical experiments, including in multi-dimensional and nonlinear settings, we validate empirically that (1) neural networks tend to learn smoothed versions of the ESF either with or without explicit regularization in training, and (2) this score smoothing effect leads the denoising dynamics to generate samples that interpolate the training data. To obtain a proxy for ∇logp t, one often uses an NN as a (time-dependent) score estimator, sθ(x, t), and train its parameters to minimize variants of the time-averagedscore matching loss(Song et al., 2021c): We first argue that NN regularization biases the score function towards a smoothed version of the ESF by analyzing a variational problem involving the score matching loss and the non-smoothness measure associated with the weight norm of two-layer ReLU NNs. Then, we show analytically how the smoothed score drives the denoising dynamics to generate distributions that interpolate between instead of memorizing the training data. 3 SCORE SMOOTHING IN ONE DIMENSION Let us begin with the simplest setup where d= 1 and S={y 1 =−1, y2 = 1} consists of n= 2 points (whereas in Appendix C, we prove extensions of all results in Sections 3 - 5 to the setup where S consists of n uniformly-spaced points). 3.1 SCORE SMOOTHING VIANNREGULARIZATION:A THEORETICAL MODEL To gain intuition, we perform experiments to fit the ESF (6) at a fixedt using the loss (4) by two-layer ReLU NNs that are regularized by weight decay (additional details given in Appendix J.1). (2019) that regularizing the weight norm of a two-layer ReLU NN (with unregularized bias and linear terms) – equivalent to applying weight decay during training – is essentially equivalent to penalizing anon-smoothnessmeasure of the estimated function defined as: Note that even without explicit weight norm regularization, this term has also been associated with theimplicitregularization effect that gradient-based training induces in two-layer ReLU NNs (Chizat and Bach, 2020). In Section 6, we will further show empirical evidence that when we train a single NN with regularization to learn the time-dependent SF through the time-averaged score matching loss (3), the solutions are indeed also closely approximated Smoothed PL-ESF. Relative to the subspace to which the training set belongs — the [x]1-axis — we may refer to the first dimension as thetangentcomponent and the other dimensions as thenormalcomponent. Proposition 4 Given any fixed ϵ∈(0,0.015) , if we choose δt =κ √ t with any κ≥F −1(ϵ), then there existst 1 >0(dependent onκ) such that the following holds for allt∈(0, t 1): In particular, if the marginal distribution of [xt]1 has a positive density on [δt −1,1−δ t], then so will [x0]1 on [−1,1] , meaning that x0 has a non-singular density that interpolates smoothly among the training data on the desired 1-D subspace. 6.2 DATA ON A CIRCLE To show that the effect of score smoothing goes beyond linearly-spaced data, we consider training sets spaced uniformly on a circle in R2 and train 2L NNswithoutweight decay to fit the ESF and drive the denoising dynamics, with results illustrated in Figure 5. Notably, this leads the denoising dynamics to generate samples that interpolate between nearby training data points in a nearly linear fashion, which forms aregular polygonthat approximates the underlying circle increasingly well as the number of training data increases. Under different coordinate systems and views, the plots each illustrate a) the samples generated by denoising diffusion with the score function learned by a two-layer NN (green dots), b) their starting positions before denoising (gray dots), and c) the training set (black “plus” signs).Left: We consider training sets both randomly sampled and regularly spaced and train two- and three-layer NNs (without weight decay) for fitting the score function. 7 CONCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS Through theoretical analyses and numerical experiments, our work shows how score smoothing can enable the denoising dynamics to produce distributions on the training data subspace without fully memorizing the training set. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks trained with the logistic loss. Based on a finite and fixed training set, our work focuses on the geometry of the SF when t is small relative to the training set sparsity and elucidates how it determines the memorization behavior via an interplay with the denoising dynamics. reducing the speed of convergence towards training data along thetangentdirection (to avoid memorization) while preserving it along thenormaldirection (to ensure a convergence onto the subspace). However, in addition to being limited to the image generation setting with CNN-based score estimators, their result does not showhownew samples are generated, but only thatifsuch samples are created, then they obey the consistency properties enforced by the CNN architecture. Building on a convex program formulation of the training of two-layer ReLU-like NNs in finite-data settings, Zhang and Pilanci (2025) derive a convex program relevant to score lea