REAL METHOD of "pFedMMA: Personalized Federated Fine-Tuning with Multi-Modal Adapter for Vision-Language Models" (arXiv 2507.05394v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

(2023a) introduces personalization by coupling a global text prompt with local visual attention modules to tailor predictions to each client’s data. Beyond prompt tuning, adapters offer another PEFT strategy by introducing small trainable modules into frozen pre-trained models Cai et al. In this work, we introduce aPersonalizedFederatedMulti-ModalAdapter (pFedMMA) architecture that adopt a multi-modal adapter design with three components: During training, all components are updated locally by each client, but only the shared projection is globally aggregated.This asymmetric training scheme enables effective personalization through client-specific projections, while promoting generalization via a shared modality-alignment space.Moreover, since only the shared adapter is communicated during rounds, the method remains communication-efficient. To address this, we introduce a multi-modal adapter framework that explicitly aims to balance personalization and generalization in federated vision-language learning.(2)We propose pFedMMA, an adapter-based approach for PFL of VLMs. Our architecture incorporates modality-specific up- and down-projection layers and a shared cross-modal projection. In this setup, each client’s local loss is computed as the average over its data: This fine-tuning step enables the model to better capture domain-specific semantics while maintaining the efficiency and generalization capabilities of the pretrained architecture. Alternatively, lightweight task-specific modules such as adapter layers Gao et al. (2019), where adapter modules are inserted sequentially after each sub-layer (e.g., attention or feed-forward),parallel adaptersHe et al. Rather than placing the adapter transfor- mation after the main layer, the parallel formulation processes the input through the adapter module concurrently with the frozen backbone transformation and combines their outputs additively. Let x∈R d be the input to a transformer sub-layer, and let f(x) denote the frozen pre-trained transformation. 3 PROPOSEDMETHOD In this section, we introduce pFedMMA, a novel framework that leverages multi-modal adapters to efficiently and effectively adapt large pre-trained VLMs under federated learning settings. This architecture has proven effective in few-shot generalization settings, where pre-trained CLIP models are fine-tuned on a limited number of base classes and tested on base and novel, unseen categories. (i) higher layers of both image and text encoders in CLIP contain more discriminative and dataset-specific features, while lower layers preserve general, transferable knowledge; and (ii) larger modality gaps between text and image encoders are observed in the lower layers, making cross-modal alignment particularly challenging in the early stages of the network Yang et al. Based on these insights, the multi-modal adapter is inserted into the upper transformer blocks of both encoders, starting from block ℓ, while the lower layers remain frozen. Each adapter consists of:(i)Adown-projectionlayer that reduces the input dimension,(ii)Ashared projectionlayer that facilitates interaction between the modalities,(iii)Anup-projectionlayer that restores the original dimension. This three-part structure allows the adapter to first transform features into a low-dimensional space, fuse them through a shared module, and then project them back. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Patch EmbedEncoderLayer 𝜃!" EncoderLayer 𝜃!ℓ EncoderLayer 𝜃!$ Patch Projection …… Text EmbedEncoderLayer 𝜃%" EncoderLayer 𝜃%ℓ EncoderLayer 𝜃%$ Text Projection……A photo of a {dog}. Image Encoder Text Encoder 𝑍&(() 𝑍*(+) cos (𝑍&(,𝑍*(+))𝑀𝑀𝐴ℓ 𝑀𝑀𝐴$ . Down UpSharedDown UpShared ααEncoderLayer 𝜃!ℓ EncoderLayer 𝜃%ℓ Down UpShared Down UpShared ααEncoderLayer 𝜃!ℓ EncoderLayer 𝜃%ℓ Client 𝑁 Client 𝑖 Down UpShared Down UpShared ααEncoderLayer 𝜃!ℓ EncoderLayer 𝜃%ℓ Client 1 Server : In contrast to methods that inject prompts or adapters across all layers Chen et al. (2022b;a), this selective, top-layer insertion strategy reduces the number of trainable parameters while maintaining cross-modal adaptability. 3.2 GENERALIZATION ANDPERSONALIZATION VIA PFEDMMA To effectively balance generalization and personalization in federated vision-language learning, we propose a hybrid training strategy within the multi-modal adapter framework. Clients are trained on their localclasses and evaluated on their own classes, onbaseclasses held by other clients, and onnovel classes that are unseen during the training process. Starting Layer ℓ.We evaluate different choices of encoder layers for integrating pFedMMA in Table 5 (top-right). As shown, updating the last three layers yields the best HM performance, which we attribute to the limited amount of training data in few-shot settings. FedPGP increases local trainables to 12,416 without extra communication but incurs the highest memory (13,374 MiB) and slower training, and its HM accuracy (79.09%) lags its strong local accuracy (95.38%). pFedMoAP adds a local gating module, raising local trainables (74,240) and the per-round download (73,728) while achieving the shortest training time (902 s) and strong local accuracy (97.89%). In2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. When federated learning meets the parameter-efficient tuning methods of pre-trained language models. 16 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A PIPELINES OF THEPROPOSEDALGORITHM For a better understanding of the steps of the designed algorithm, we present pFedMMA in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1pFedMMA 1:Input:Step sizeη, number of communication roundsT, number of local epochE, number of clientsN. (2024), or leverage attention mechanisms and adaptive layers Liang et al. While these approaches have demonstrated success, they typically center on traditional ML architectures and do not yet fully leverage the potential of large pre-trained models, such as vision-language or foundation models, for personalization. (2023a) introduces a non-parametric attention module over local few-shot memory, and pFedPG Yang et al. integrates attention-based adapters to better exploit the pre-trained model’s knowledge. (2022) inject lightweight MLP layers after the image encoder to refine visual representations. (2024) introduces a FedDG framework for pre-trained vision-language models based on visual and textual prompt learning and attention-based prompt aggregation, explicitly using a leave-one-domain-out 