REAL METHOD of "Lifelong Embodied Navigation Learning" (arXiv 2603.06073v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Follow the instruction to complete navigation Scene 1 Scene 2 Scene 3 Scene 4 Scene 5 Scene 6 Scene 7… …Scene t (Follow user step-by-step instructions) Uni-Walker V3 Vision-Language Navigation Please find a white double bed in the main bedroom on the right room. To tackle this problem, we propose Uni-Walker, a lifelong embodied nav- igation framework that decouples navigation knowledge into task-shared and task-specific components with Decoder Extension LoRA (DE-LoRA). To learn the shared knowledge, we design a knowledge inheritance strategy and an ex- perts co-activation strategy to facilitate shared knowledge transfer and refinement across multiple navigation tasks. To learn the specific knowledge, we propose an expert subspace orthogonality constraint together and a navigation-specific chain-of-thought reasoning mechanism to capture specific knowledge and enhance instruction-style understanding. To develop a universal embodied navigation agent, recent methods leverage pretrained large lan- guage models (LLMs) Naveed et al. Although these agents undergo large-scale joint training across multiple navigation tasks, they struggle to generalize across all tasks and often lack continual adaptabil- ity to ever-changing new navigation scenarios. 2(a)) of previously learned tasks if there is insufficient memory and computational resources to store the full training data of old tasks and retrain the pretrained LLMs. (2022) to fine-tune pretrained LLMs on each navigation task and store their task- specific low-rank weights for inference. To address the above challenges, we introduce Lifelong Embodied Navigation Learning (LENL) in this work, a novel problem where agents are required to continually adapt to a sequence of navigation tasks while retaining previ- ously acquired navigation knowledge, ultimately developing into a universal embodied navigation agent (i.e., capable VLN, OLN, DUN), as Fig. To learn the shared navigation knowledge, we design a knowledge inheritance Strategy (KIS) and an experts co-activation strategy (ECAS) to facilitate task-shared knowledge transfer and refinement across 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 multiple navigation tasks. To learn the specific navigation knowledge, we propose an expert sub- space orthogonality constraint (ESOC) and a navigation-specific chain-of-thought (NSCoT) reason- ing mechanism to facilitate the learning of task-specific knowledge representations and tailor reason- ing processes according to different instruction styles (VLN, OLN, DUN). •We introduce a novel Lifelong Embodied Navigation Learning (LENL) problem that enables navi- gation agents to continually learn new navigation tasks, including new scenes and instruction styles. We also build a new lifelong embodied navigation benchmark for training and evaluating. •We propose Uni-Walker with a Decoder Extension LoRA (DE-LoRA) to decouple task-shared knowledge and task-specific knowledge across multiple navigation tasks (with multiple scenes and diverse instruction styles), to achieve efficient lifelong embodied navigation learning. •We propose a Knowledge Inheritance Strategy (KIS) and an Experts Co-Activation Strategy (ECAS) to facilitate task-shared knowledge transfer and continual refinement across multiple navi- gation tasks, for exploring and exploiting the task-shared knowledge across multiple tasks. •We propose an Expert Subspace Orthogonality Constraint (ESOC) to constrain each expert sub- space to fully learn task-specific knowledge, and a Navigation Specific Chain of Thought (NSCoT) to provide specific chain of thought reasoning processes for each instruction style navigation, for exploring and exploiting the task-specific knowledge across multiple navigation tasks. (2018a), denoted as TV LN, requires the agent to follow the user step-by-step instructions and navigate to the destination within the scene. At each timei, the navigation agent reasons user instructionI i with the current observationO i to output the the next direction:D i =F(V(O i),I i), thus navigation step by step to the destination. In this case, the featuresx l of each transformer layer are processed as:yl =W l 0xl +Bl tAl txl, where the low-rank learnable weightsBl t ∈ Rbl×r can be regarded as decoder andA l t ∈R r×al can be regarded as encoder. To address LENL, a trivial solution is to train and save all low-rank adaptation weights for all navigation tasks so far, and then load the specific weights at inference time. 3.2 EXTENSIONEXPERTSINCREMENTALLEARNING To explore the task-shared and task-specific knowledge between sequential navigation tasks setT, and consolidate the DE-LoRA architecture, we propose an Extension Experts Incremental Learning 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 strategy. (2015) to initial- ize knowledge base parametersK={A,B 1}, and then train the parameters{A,B 1}to adapt task T1. Then we compute the mean parameter vector µ= 1 j−i+1 Pj k=i θk, and obtain centered vectors ˜θk =θ k −µ. 4 (a), we activate TOP-K experts with the TAKA strategy (§3.3) for each task, which includes not only the specific trainableB t expert, but also the related experts{B ∗ 1, ...,B∗ K−1 }that are computed in the forward pass but parameter frozen: Specifically, to consolidate the shared architecture of subspaceAand facilitate task-specific knowledge learning, we propose ESOC to perform orthogonal constraint on expert subspaceB t: In VLN task, the agent is required to follow the user’s detailed step- by-step instructions, and the reasoning tends to be navigation process tracking. In summary, during the lifelong navigation learning process for thet-th taskT t, the total adaptation loss for the LLM-based navigation agentFperforming auto-regressive action generation training is: We compute the cosine similarity for eachE S,t based on the agent’s observation embeddings Eo =EV(O q)and eachE I,t based on the embedding provided by user instructionE i =ET(I q): Training and Evaluation Settings:To ensure fair comparisons, our methods and all comparison methods are performed with NavLLM Zheng et al. (2024) uses a shared moduleAfor common knowledge and multipleBmodules for task-specific learning, BranchLoRAZhang et al. (2018a) requires user step-by-step grounding of detailed instructions, and has been widely studied in both discrete Anderson et al. Building upon these advances, recent efforts aim to construct universal navigation agents by jointly training across multiple tasks, leveraging larg