REAL METHOD of "Adaptive Data-Knowledge Alignment in Genetic Perturbation Prediction" (arXiv 2510.00512v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this chal- lenge, we propose ALIGNED (Adaptive aLignment for Inconsistent Genetic kNowledgE and Data), a neuro-symbolic framework based on the Abductive Learning (ABL) paradigm. We introduce a balanced consistency metric to evaluate the predictions’ consis- tency against both data and knowledge. Our results show that ALIGNED outperforms state-of-the-art methods by achieving the highest balanced consistency, while also re-discovering biologically meaningful knowledge. Our work advances beyond existing methods to enable both the trans- parency and the evolution of mechanistic biological understanding. Two complementary approaches have emerged, either by leveraging latent representations trained on extensive cell data ( Lotfollahi et al. While hybrid meth- ods incorporate prior biological knowledge, they treat this knowledge as static constraints rather than interpretable and updatable representations of biological understanding. Based on this approach, we propose ALIGNED (Adaptive aLignment for Inconsistent Genetic kNowledgE and Data), an end- to-end framework that enables neuro-symbolic alignment and knowledge refinement in ge- netic perturbation prediction. ALIGNED advances beyond existing predictive methods to enhance transparency about the underlying biological mechanisms and enable continual evolution of understanding from large-scale perturbation datasets. We design a balanced evaluation metric that assesses predictions against both experimental data and curated knowledge. ALIGNED matches or exceeds state-of-the-art methods in predictive accuracy while substantially outperforms existing methods in balanced consistency. The output values indicate decreased expression, no significant change, or increased expression for each gene. An unlabelled dataset Xu is also used for training in abductive learning, which contains only the perturbation input. Given an input perturbation x, we infer its effect on a genome scale by performing a de- ductive query in the knowledge base KB. Based on this approach, we define a measurement for the data-knowledge inconsistency illustrated in Figure 1: Our approach differs from the Known Relation- ships Retrieval metric ( Celik et al. A general ABL training pipeline takes a neural model f pretrained on labelled data ⟨Xl, Yl⟩ as initialization. Consistency optimization is then performed, with revising ˆy to ¯y and updating f on the revised dataset⟨Xu, ¯Y⟩. Formally, the objective of ABL 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Symbolic Component Neural Component ! Gene Regulatory Knowledge Base Perturbation Data Data-Knowledge Inconsistency Refined Knowledge Base Neural Predictions Neuro- Symbolic Predictions Adaptive Alignment Knowledge Refinement Symbolic Predictions Update Update Adaptor Train Genes Cells Figure 2: max f p(y| x; f,KB) = I ( KB∪ x|= f (x) ) p(y| x; f ) where on the right hand side “ |=” denotes logical entailment, the first term is an indicator of consistency and the second term denotes the posterior distribution of neural predictions. 3 The ALIGNED Method We first introduce a consistency metric for evaluating how well predictions align with both the test data and the knowledge base. We then present ALIGNED (Adaptive aLignment for Inconsistent Genetic kNowledgE and Data), a framework which adaptively integrates reliable information from both sources to predict genetic perturbation responses. 3.1 The Balanced Consistency Metric To evaluate the consistency of a prediction against both the test data and the knowledge base, we define a balanced consistency metric F1 balance, which considers the macro F1 scores from both the test dataset and the knowledge base. Unless specified, all F1 scores in evaluations are computed as macro F1. The neural component fy is a neural network which predicts perturbation responses from input data, while the symbolic component KB performs symbolic reasoning over gene regulatory networks encoded as matrices (computed via Equation 1). The adap- tor fa learns to combine neural and symbolic predictions based on their relative reliability for each prediction. We initialize components fy and fa by training them jointly on the labelled dataset. For each unlabelled input, the framework produces a neural and a symbolic prediction. In adaptive alignment, since these predictions may be inconsistent, the adaptor is trained to produce a binary indicator vector that selects which predictive source to trust for each output dimension. The framework then performs multiple iterations of alignment and bidirectional updates to neural and symbolic components. Using the neural-symbolic predictions, we re-train the neural component and perform knowledge refinement to the symbolic component. Our definition of the training objectives for the adaptor can be divided into three parts. Inc(a, x, ˆy,KB) =∥δKB(x)− ¯y∥0 Second, we design a loss term to leverage as much information from labelled training data as possible to reduce the predictions’ inconsistency with data. To measure this, we use a weight vector w as hyperparameter, which contains the number of training data samples that are inconsistent with KB (computed by Equation 2), and the number of annotations from Gene Ontology ( Ashburner et al. We train fa with the REIN- FORCE algorithm ( Williams, 1992; Hu et al. For each method, we evaluated (i) data consistency F1( ¯Y , Ytest) which measures predictive performance; (ii) knowledge con- sistency F1( ¯Y , δKB(X)) which quantifies the extent to which the model remains grounded in curated biological prior; and (iii) the balanced consistency metric F1 balance defined as Equation 3 evaluating the trade-off between inconsistent sources. 4.3 Perturbation Prediction on Bacterial Genome (Q3) We evaluate our method on the Escherichia coli (E. ALIGNED with “A-R” executes align- ment and then refinement, whereas “A-R-A” performs an additional alignment step. We tracked performance through a progressively richer procedure of ALIGNED iterations, including the neural-only models trained solely on labelled data and two complete iterations of neuro-symbolic alignment and knowledge refinement. ALIGNED with “A-R” executes alignment and then refinement, whereas “A-R-A” performs an additional alignment step. The formulation is path-dependent and encodes how positive and negative regulations compose across multi-step pathways. Under our experimental setup, the training time of ALIGNED is manageable given the size of the GRN and the