REAL METHOD of "Learning to Grasp Anything By Playing with Random Toys" (arXiv 2510.12866v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This method first uses a mask of the target object to constrain the vision encoder’s attention to the object region, and then applies mean pooling on the output features corresponding to the object patches. trained on a small dataset of 250 “C ´ezanne toys” with 1,500 demonstrations, our policy achieves a 67% success rate on 64 real-world YCB (Calli et al., 2015) objects, significantly outperforming larger, state-of-the-art models like OpenVLA- OFT (Kim et al., 2025) andπ 0-FAST (Black et al., 2024; Pertsch et al., 2025) that are pretrained on much more data. 3 THELEGO METHOD To enable a policy trained on our “C´ezanne toys” to generalize to real-world objects, we introduce a novel object-centric approach. Our method’s key distinction from full-scene architectures is its use of a detection pooling mechanism to obtain an object-centric visual representation, which we empir- ically show is the key to robust generalization. This section details our preliminaries (Section 3.1), full architecture (Section 3.2), and the detection pooling method (Section 3.3). The observations typically consist of visual observationsi 1:T and proprioceptive statess 1:T , where Tis the episode length,i t ∈R N×H×W×3 denotes the images captured byNcameras at time step t, ands t ∈R ds is the proprioception (e.g., the joint positions) of the robot at stept. The training objective is to learn a policy that maps a history of the pastCsteps— visual inputsi t−C+1:t and robot statess t−C+1:t—to a future action sequence of lengthK, in order to successfully complete the task:π(i t−C+1:t , st−C+1:t )→a t:t+K−1. 3.2 ARCHITECTURE Below, we describe the different components of our policy architecture as well as the training objec- tive. Given the observationsi t−C+1:t ands t−C+1:t from pastCsteps, our model uses a vision encoder to encode each set of visual observationsi t into visual embeddingse 1:N t , where en t ∈R de is the embedding of then-th camera image at stept, andd e is the hidden dimension of the vision encoder. We use a pretrained MVP (Xiao et al., 2022) as the vision encoder. These resulting features are then input into a transformer-based architecture for further processing. It first concatenates the visual embeddingse 1:N t and the proprioceptions t along the channel dimension into a single token, and then projects it with an MLP. The transformer backbone then takes the projected tokens from all pastCsteps and predicts the concatenated actionsa t:t+K−1 for the nextKsteps from the last token. Following the regular behavior cloning algorithm, the training loss is the meanℓ 1 loss between the predicted actionsˆa t:t+K−1 and the ground-truth actionsa t:t+K−1, i.e., L= 1 Kd a ∥ˆat:t+K−1 −a t:t+K−1 ∥1. To enable generalization to novel objects, we design the vision encoder to be object-centric through detection pooling, introduced in the next section. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3.3 DETECTIONPOOLING We design a detection pooling mechanism in the vision encoder such that the extracted visual fea- ture is focused on the object to be grasped, as shown in Figure 3 (b). Specifically, we first obtain the object segmentation mask for each frame using SAM 2 (Ravi et al., 2024b). We then use the object mask to set the attention mask in the vision encoder such that there is no attention between object patch tokens and non-object patch tokens. Note that this method still allows the vision encoder to understand where the object is in the scene due to the use of positional embeddings. We empirically find that DetPool is crucial for achieving strong zero-shot generalization compared to other pooling methods such as mean and attention pooling that do not restrict the attention mask within the ViT and only pool the final output tokens (Section 4.2). Its ar- chitecture consists of a ViT-L encoder from MVP (Xiao et al., 2022) for feature extraction and a ViT-Base transformer backbone. The model then conditions on state vectors from past timesteps and predicts action vectors for future timesteps, where state and action vectors are represented using absolute joint angles, rather than relative (delta) angles. Our training set contains 2,500 demonstrations, comprising 10 successful grasps for each of our 250 unique toys. We compare LEGO (86M parameters) against two significantly larger, state-of-the-art VLAs that rely on large-scale pretraining:π 0-FAST (3B) (Black et al., 2024) and OpenVLA-OFT (7B) (Kim et al., 2025).π 0-FAST is a state-of-the-art VLA model trained on a large-scale robotics dataset. We compare LEGO with strong baselines includingπ 0-FAST, OpenVLA-OFT, and ShapeGrasp (Li et al., 2024b) which is a training-free, LLM-based approach that uses pretrained language models to decompose objects geometrically before selecting a graspable part. A common theme across these methods is reliance on large-scale pretraining: For each set, we collect 2,500 total grasping demon- strations and train our model using varying numbers of demonstrations per set. For each case, the model is trained with varying numbers of demonstrations. We analyze the geometric similarity between the training toys and target objects by computing the Chamfer distance (CD) between each target object and its closest counterpart in the training set. Toy Complexity 25 125 250 Two Primitives 9.04 32.6 44.42 Three Primitives 7.31 15.77 23.17 Four Primitives 7.69 12.4 23.36 Five Primitives 4.32 10.87 10.19 Table 6:Geometric similarity analysis between training toys and target objects.Objects are grouped into difficulty buckets based on the 33rd and 66th percentiles of Chamfer distance (CD) to the closest training object. Compared to these approaches, which usually require costly visual pretraining, we improve generalizability by obtaining object-centric visual representa- tions via DetPool, which is light-weight and can be applied to any pretrained vision model. (2017) address generalizable robot learning through object- centric methods by using attention mechanisms. However, it is only limited to CLIP, while our method can be applied to any vision transformer. Our method learns an object-centric visual representation using a de- tection pooling and transformer architecture, and is trained on a dataset of 250 toys with 1,500 demonstrations in the real Franka setting. 7 LIMITATIONS ANDFUTUREWORK While we show that our method offers a promising path toward generalized grasping, it is important to acknowledge its limitations to guide future res