REAL METHOD of "Disentangled representation learning through unsupervised symmetry group discovery" (arXiv 2603.11790v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we remove these constraints by proposing a method whereby an embodied agent autonomously discovers the group structure of its action space through unsupervised interaction with the environment. Our method is validated on three environments exhibiting different group decompositions, where it outperforms existing LSBD approaches. For this reason, many unsupervised disentangled representation learning methods have been proposed, initially relying on Variational Autoencoders (V AEs) (Kim & Mnih, 2018; Kumar et al., 2018; Higgins et al., 2017) or Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Chen et al., 2016). • We introduce a novel method for learning a LSBD representation directly from a group de- composition, without imposing any structural assumptions on the subgroups, and we provide theoretical guarantees of disentanglement under specific assumptions. • We combine these two algorithms and show experimentally that the full method outperforms other LSBD methods on several datasets with different group structures. We define a generative processb:WÑXthat maps a state to an observation, and an encoderh:XÑZthat maps observations into a latent representation. 3 RELATEDWORK Several methods have been proposed to learn LSBD representations from transitions, all relying on auto-encoder architectures.Forward-VAE(Caselles-Dupr ´e et al., 2019) augments the evidence lower bound (ELBO) of a V AE with a latent-space action loss. Disentanglement is encouraged by constraining the matricesρpgqto follow a predefined structure, which requires prior knowledge of the subgroup decomposition of the symmetry group, as well as the minimal number of latent dimen- sions assigned to each subgroup. This prior knowledge allows the model to align the latent geometry with the group structure and to incorporate an action-aligned loss term, in the spirit of Forward-V AE.Homomorphism AutoEncoder(HAE), proposed by Keurti et al. 4.1 (STEP1) LEARN AN ENTANGLED REPRESENTATION Our objective is to learn an encoderh:XÑZ“R d and an action representation ρψ :GÑR dˆd satisfying the equivariance property defined in Definition 1. To perform this step, we introduce a method referred to asAction-based VAE(A-V AE), which builds upon the varia- tional autoencoder (V AE) framework (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). logppτqě´ 1 2 ››ρψpgqµϕpxq´µ ϕpx1q ››2 ´ 1 2}σϕpx1q}2` ÿ i logσ ϕpx1qi ) action part ´E z1„qϕpz1|x1q «ÿ i logσ θpz1qi` ›››› x1´µ θpz1q σθpz1q ›››› 2ff ) reconstruction part (4) Analogously toβ-V AE (Higgins et al., 2017), we introduce a weighting coefficient to balance the two components of the objective, resulting in the loss functionL“L REC`λ ACTLACT. 4.2 (STEP2) LEARN THE GROUP STRUCTURE Once the action representationρ ψ and the encoderh“µ θ have been learned, we aim to leverage them to recover the group decompositionG“G 1ˆ¨¨¨ˆG K. Although this assumption is not always stated explicitly, it is in fact a necessary condition for all SBD representation learning algorithms and is not specific to our method. In the scenario illustrated in Figure 4, Assumption 3 allows us to assume that situation (b) will never occur, our method will thus assume that the environment corresponds to case (a). 4.2.2 ALGORITHM We now introduce a method to recover the group decomposition i.e. Given an encoding functionh:XÑR d and a matrixAPR dˆd, we define the following semi-norm: 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Based on Theorem 2, we design a clustering algorithm that groups together actionsgandg 1 when- everd Gpg, g1q ďη. 4.3 (STEP3) LEARN A DISENTANGLED REPRESENTATION Now that we have the symmetry group decomposition, we aim to find a linear disentangled repre- sentationi.e.a decompositionZ“Z 1‘¨¨¨‘Z K and an action representationρ“ρ 1‘¨¨¨‘ρ K such that for each actiong“ pg 1, . In our method, we additionally choose to search for represen- tations where the disentanglement aligns with Cartesian axes of the latent spaceZ“Z 1ˆ¨¨¨ˆZ K. In order to promote disentanglement, we introduce an additional term in the A-V AE loss function that encourages the vectorsπ k to be close to be binary. However, empir- ical observations show that directly minimizing this entropy causes it to collapse to zero before the other loss components begin to decrease, leading to a random dimension assignment. To address this issue, we define the disentanglement loss asL DIS “ ř i|Hpπ:,iq´C|, whereCis a target entropy value that is gradually annealed from its maximum to zero during training. Theorem 3.If Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied, the dataset contains all the transitions andGis finite, then the encoders minimizing the GMA-VAE loss are LSBD representations with respect to xW, b,ś kxGkyywithxG kyrepresenting the subgroup generated byG k. We introduce a modified LSBD-V AE in which the action representationρis learned rather than provided, we refer to this variant as method LSBD-V AE˚. For A-V AE we arbitrarily chose a latent dimension of 13, for the LSBD methods we chose the minimal dimension depending on the method and the symmetry group. Similarly toFlatland(Caselles-Dupr ´e et al., 2018), our first environment consists of a disk moving along thexandyaxes over a black background as illustrated Figure 1. For each factori, we define a cyclic symmetry groupG i“Z{k iZand an action set consisting of two shifts,G i“tg ´ i , g` i u, corresponding to increments and decrements along the factor axis. To assess the robustness of our method, we consider more challeng- ing settings with both complex action sets and limited transition coverage. For more clarity we do not present the disentanglement of unsupervised methods as they perform significantly worse than LSBD methods. The first observation is that all methods perform poorly in MIG and SAP as these two metrics require each ground truth factor of variation to be encoded in a unique dimension. The only exception is COIL2 as the permutation groupS 2 can be encoded in only one dimension with our method. The second observation is that our method performs almost perfectly for the other metrics and yields a disentanglement comparable to the supervised method LSBD-V AE. To this end, we use the trained models to pre- dict a final observation given an initial observation and a sequence of actions. First, en- tangled self-supervised methods (A-V AE and SOBDRL) achieve good short-term predictions but quickly diverge as the sequence length increases. This is explained by the fact that, with acces