REAL METHOD of "FilMaster: Bridging Cinematic Principles and Generative AI for Automated Film Generation" (arXiv 2506.18899v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Using a textual theme and reference images for characters and locations, FilMaster crafts high-quality films complete with professional camera language and cinematic rhythm, including rich, multi-layered audiovisual outputs (foley, sound effects (SFX), voice-over(VO), background ambiance, musical scoring, and video). To address these limitations, we introduce FilMas- ter, a comprehensive end-to-end AI-powered automated film generation system to integrate real-world cinematic prin- ciples for professional-grade film generation, yielding ed- itable and industry-standard outputs. Our Reference-Guided Generation Stage highlights a Multi-shot Synergized RAG Camera Language Design module to guide the AI system to generate professional and expressive camera language in videos by retrieving reference clips from a vast cor- pus of 440,000 film clips. Our Generative Post-Production Stage emulates professional post-production by designing an Audience-Centric Cinematic Rhythm Control module, including a Rough Cut assembly, a Fine Cut process in- formed by simulated audience feedback, for the effective integration of audiovisual elements through video editing 1 and sound design, to achieve engaging content and emo- tional impact. Furthermore, we introduce FilmEval, a compre- hensive benchmark for evaluating AI-generated films across key cinematic dimensions. They typically use LLMs for scriptwrit- ing, and then generate sequential video clips independently through visual generation models [19, 40]. To address these challenges, we propose FilMaster, an automated film generation system designed to bridge the gap from script to screen with industry-standard output (Figure 2). Our approach is built upon two key cine- matic principles: Inspired by the recent progress of MLLMs, which show great promise in understanding com- plex text scripts, videos, and audio, we introduce MLLMs to implement such cinematic principles in FilMaster. This stage takes the input text and the reference character/location images as input, leverages (M)LLMs for video content planning and script structuring, and then gen- erates video clips with video generation models. Guided by our first principle, we propose Multi-shot Synergized RAG Camera Language Design module to address the shortcomings of existing methods that often produce tem- plated or overly generic camera language by learning pro- fessional cinematography from real films. FilMaster uti- lizes RAG with a vast dataset of 440,000 real film clips to retrieve relevant cinematic descriptions, which are indexed by film clips’ annotated textual descriptions, based on the query of scene’s textual context. To synergize the cam- 2 era language between multiple shots within the same scene, we take multiple shots into consideration with the spatio- temporal contexts and narrative objectives to retrieve ref- erence film clips. These retrieved textual descriptions then serve as references for an LLM to learn professional cin- ematography to re-plan shots, including shot types, cam- era movements, angles, and atmospheric characteristics, aligned with the scene’s narrative objectives. This stage transforms the raw footage from the previous stage into rich, multi-layered audiovisual outputs, orchestrating both visual and auditory elements to achieve cinematic rhythms. Guided by our second prin- ciple, we propose Audience-Centric Cinematic Rhythm Control module to address the common issue of flat, un- engaging AI-generated content by emulating professional, audience-centric post-production workflows. This feedback then guides a sophisticated Fine Cut editing process. We propose FilMaster, the first comprehensive AI-based film generation system explicitly designed around cine- matic principles to guide camera language and cinematic rhythm. Method We introduce the overview of our system in Section 3.1, and detail the two core innovation modules, Multi-shot Syner- gized RAG Camera Language Design module in Section 3.2 and Audience-Centric Cinematic Rhythm Control module in Section 3.3, respectively. (1) spatio-temporal-aware indexing for embedding scene contexts, (2) film reference retrieval for retrieving similar cinematic examples, and (3) shot re- planning for generating coherent and expressive cinematog- raphy. Key innovations include the (1) Multi-shot Synergized RAG Camera Language Design module within the Reference-Guided Generation Stage stage, leveraging real film data for coherent and expressive visuals, and the (2) Audience-Centric Cinematic Rhythm Control module within the Generative Post-Production Stage stage, emulating professional post- production for enhanced audience engagement. Each scene block, rich with spatio-temporal contexts and nar- rative objectives, serves as the precise query for the sub- sequent retrieval and generation process, ensuring that the learned camera language is deeply aligned with the specific narrative objectives of each shot within the same scene. Then the pro- cess prioritizes and retrieves the top-K film references that demonstrate the greatest similarity to this query vector. This analysis focuses on iden- tifying effective visual storytelling methods that can en- hance the visual impact and narrative objectives of each scene block. The shot re-planning generation specifies appropriate shot types, camera movements, angles, and atmospheric de- scriptions for each shot, while keeping the original narrative content and objectives intact. Therefore, to address this, we propose a Audience-Centric Cinematic Rhythm Control module. Inspired by professional film post-production workflows [5] that progressively refine rhythm, this module emulates this process by first assembling and reviewing aRough Cut from a simulated audience-centric perspective. It then proceeds 5 to a Fine Cut , where it orchestrates the visual narrative structure and pacing through video editing, and integrates a rich, multi-layered soundscape through sound design, mak- ing the film compelling in both its emotional resonance and audience engagement. This currently involves combin- ing the video sequences generated by the Multi-shot Syner- gized RAG Camera Language Design module with LLM- generated audio textual descriptions (VO) for each scene block, serving as a temporary placeholder for the sound- scape for easier understanding by the audience. Thus, we propose multi-scale A/V synchro- nization for effective integration of audiovisual elements, including background ambi