REAL METHOD of "Solving General-Utility Markov Decision Processes in the Single-Trial Regime with Online Planning" (arXiv 2505.15782v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, despite providing a flexible framework concerning objective-specification, previous re- search has shown that multiple relevant objectives cannot be easily expressed within the MDP framework (Abel et al., 2022). Such objectives include, but not limited to, imitation learning (Hus- sein et al., 2017; Osa et al., 2018), pure exploration problems (Hazan et al., 2019), risk-averse RL (Garc´ıa et al., 2015), diverse skills discovery (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Achiam et al., 2018), con- strained MDPs (Altman, 1999; Efroni et al., 2020), and adversarial MDPs (Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019). Recent works unified such objectives under the GUMDP framework and proposed algorithms to solve GUMDPs with convex objectives (Zhang et al., 2020; Geist et al., 2022; Zahavy et al., 2021). In this work, we introduce the first approach for solving GUMDPs in the single-trial regime, i.e., when the agent’s performance is evaluated based on a single trial/trajectory. Second, we introduce a Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) algorithm to solve the occupancy MDP, effectively solving the GUMDP in the single-trial regime via online planning. Our approach provably retrieves the optimal action at each timestep for a sufficiently high number of iterations. For a given actiona∈ A, each row of matrixP a satisfiesP a(s,·)∈∆(S), encoding the probability of transition from statesat the present timestep to any other state at the next timestep when choosing actiona. A decision ruleπ t specifies the procedure for action selection at timestept. .)is a sequence of decision rules, one for each timestep. This is in contrast to the MDP framework, where the objective of the agent is encoded by the cost, a function of state-action pairs. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 The objective of the agent is encoded byf: The objective is then to find π∗ = arg min π∈ΠS f(d π).(2) We highlight that, whenfis a linear function, we are under the standard MDP setting; iffis convex, then we are under the convex MDP setting (Zahavy et al., 2021). Thesingle-trial truncatedobjective is defined as F1,H (π) =E  f(d π,H )  .(6) We note that the single-trial truncated objective is more general than the single-trial objective. In particular, it has been shown that, in general, the performance of a given policy under the single and infinite trials formulations differs and, consequently, the optimal policy for each objective may also differ. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Intuitively, the proposition above shows that we can resort to the single-trial truncated objective, as introduced in equation 6, to find an approximately optimal policy for the original objective defined in equation 5, up to any desired tolerance. In particular, ifπis the optimal policy for the single-trial truncated objective, i.e.,OptGap H (π) = 0, then it holds thatOptGap(π)≤8Lγ H, which can be made arbitrarily small by tuning our truncation horizonH. Thus, we can focus our attention on deterministic non-Markovian policies when solvingM f with objectiveF 1,H, i.e., for any GUMDP and horizonH∈N, it holds thatmin π∈ΠNM F1,H (π) = minπ∈ΠD NM F1,H (π). Theorem 3(NP-Hardness of policy optimization in the single-trial regime).Given a GUMDP with objectiveF 1,H and a threshold valueλ∈R, it is NP-Hard to determine whether there exists a policy π∈Π D NM satisfyingF 1,H (π)≤λ. Naturally, in a worst-case sense, these algorithms may require a non- polynomial number of steps to retrieve the optimal policy. After a given number of iterations, the planning algorithm selects an action to execute in the environment; depending on the selected action, the en- vironment evolves to a new state, and the process repeats until timestepH. At timesteptof the interaction, the MCTS algorithm builds a planning tree rooted at the current state{st,o t}, following the four phases outlined in Sec. Remark 2(Convergence).Under Assumption 2, for any horizonH∈N, the MCTS algorithm provably solves the occupancy MDP as the number of iterations of the algorithm per timestep grows to infinity. More precisely, for any horizonH∈N, we have thatOptGap H (πMCTS) = 0as the number of iterations of the algorithm per timestep grows to infinity, where we letπMCTS be the policy induced by the MCTS algorithm at each timestep. Under Assumption 2, for any horizonH, there exists an MCTS-based algorithm such that, when applied to solve the occupancy MDP withnexpansion steps, yields a sequence of policies(π 1, . The first set consists of the illustrative GUMDPs depicted in Fig. (i) a random policy,π Random; and (ii) the optimal policy for the infinite trials formulation equation 2,π ∗ Solver, calculated by solving a constrained optimization problem with objectivefvia a standard optimization solver. We denote the policy induced by our MCTS algorithm asπ MCTS and consider 4000 iterations per timestep (results with other numbers of iterations in the Appendix C). Our work takes a first step towards a broader application of GUMDPs in real-world settings where the agent’s performance is typically evaluated under a single trial. Task Objective (f(d)) Lipschitz constant (L) MDPs/RLd ⊤c,c∈R |S||A| maxs,a |c(s, a)| Pure explorationd ⊤ log(d)|log(ϵ) + 1|(†) Imitation learning∥d−d β∥2 2,d β ∈∆(S × A) 4 Adversarial MDPsmax k∈{1,...,K} d⊤ck maxk∈{1,...,K} {maxs,a |ck(s, a)|} Objective functionf(d) =c ⊤dIt holds that |f(d 1)−f(d 2)|=|c ⊤(d1 −d 2)|= X s,a |c(s, a)||d1(s, a)−d2(s, a)| ≤max s,a |c(s, a)|∥d1 −d 2∥1. Step (b) follows from the fact thats 3 =s 0 with probability one for trajecto- ries drawn from the GUMDP, i.e., for any trajectory the state at timestep3is alwayss 0, and thus we 16 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 can split and simplify the expectation. Step (c) follows from Jensen’s inequality, following similar steps as those for the first part of the Theorem. (i) ifs 0 =s 1, then at timestepst= 1,5,9, . .deterministically actiona 1; (ii) ifs 0 =s 2, then at timestepst= 1,5,9, . B.6 PROOF OFTHEOREM3 Theorem 3(NP-Hardness of policy optimization in the single-trial regime).Given a GUMDP with objectiveF 1,H and a threshold valueλ∈R, it is NP-Hard to determine whether there exists a policy π∈Π D NM satisfyingF 1,H (π)≤λ. (i) maximum state entropy exploration (Hazan et al., 2019), where the objective is to visit all state-action pairs as uniformly as possible; imitation learning (Abbeel & Ng, 2004), where the objective is to imitate a given behaviour policy; and (iii) adversarial MDPs (Rosenberg & Mans