REAL METHOD of "villa-X: Enhancing Latent Action Modeling in Vision-Language-Action Models" (arXiv 2507.23682v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our approach improves bothhow latent actions are learnedandhow they are incorporated into VLA pre-training. This motivates our investigation into two pivotal questions:how to better learn latent actions, andhow to more effectively integrate them into VLA pre-training? In this paper, we introduce villa-X, a novel Vision-Language-Latent-Action (ViLLA) framework that advances both key aspects of latent action modeling. To better leverage learned latent actions, we introduce a novel integration strategy for VLA pre-training. First, extensive ablation studies confirm that our proposed improvements to the latent action model and policy architecture outperform existing methods. Our method advances the latent action framework by enhancing both the modeling of latent actions and their integration into VLA pre-training. A Vision-Language-Latent-Action Model Figure 2:Architecture of ACT:A hierarchical policy that predicts latent action plans and conditions robot action generation on them, incorporating embodiment context and attention masking. For robotic learning, methods have started to incorporate latent actions into VLA pretraining [1, 7, 9, 10, 38, 50, 66, 68]. Our method improves upon prior work in several key aspects: 3 Method Our method, villa-X, learns a physically grounded latent action space and uses it to train a VLA policy. (ii) ACT or Module (ACT)builds on a pre-trained vision-language backbone and jointly models sequences of latent and robot actions for improved planning and control. (i) LAM pretraining on diverse datasets, (ii) ACT pretraining with joint latent–robot modeling, and (iii) embodiment-specific finetuning. Proprioceptive Grounding.To address this, we introduce an additionalproprioceptive Forward Dynamics Model (proprio-FDM)that predicts both future robot states and actions K steps ahead, given the current stateq t and latentz t: The full LAM thus optimizes image reconstruction loss, proprioceptive prediction loss, and vector- quantization commitments jointly. 3.2 Actor Module (ACT) Our ACT module extends traditional vision-language-action (VLA) approaches by explicitly modeling bothlatent actions( zK t:t+(n−1)K = (zt, zt+K..., zt+(n−1)K )) androbot actions( at:t+m−1 = (at, at+1, ...,at+m−1 )) with a joint diffusion process. This explicit modeling and factorization improves upon prior methods, such as LAPA [68], which rely on latent actions only through pre-trained weight initialization. By contrast, our method treats latent actions as a distinct mid-level representation that bridges high-level vision and language prompts with low-level robot actions, and allow for allowing more effective and structured information transfer from latent actions to robot actions. Architecture.ACT(Figure 2) comprises three experts with a blockwise causal attention mask: During training, we stochastically mask the attention from robot actions to latent actions. The objective is to train a networkv θ τ that minimizes the flow matching loss: The network vθ τ(xτ t , Ot) is then trained to predicted the denoising vector field u(x τ t |x t) =ϵ−x t. Specifically, after training the latent action models, we freeze them and train a simple 3-layer MLP to predict the corre- sponding robot actions for each latent action. We train the MLP on the training split of LIBERO and evaluate it using the L1 loss on the validation split. For each model variant (w/pp and wo/pp), we compute the number of validation samples whose maximum L1 error falls below a threshold. Policy Pre-trainingNext, we compare how the latent actions generated by different variants of LAM (w/pp and wo/pp) influence policy pre-training. Unlike the main experiments, we pretrain models in this section on a mixture of 10% Fractal [5] data, 10% Bridge V2 [17] data, and 100% Something-Something V2 [19] data, to reduce computation cost while remaining a setting where limited robot data are available for training the VLA model. We evaluate our method on the visual matching setting. 4.2 Can the actor module effectively leverage the pre-trained latent actions? Given high-quality latent actions produced by the pre-trained LAM, we investigate whether our design can effectively leverage them to pre-train robot control policies. We compare our approach against two recent methods that also utilize latent actions, albeit in different ways: we first train the VLM to predict latent actions, then replace the latent action prediction head with a robot action prediction head and continue training on data with robot action labels. Following the experiment setup in the previous subsection, we train all models on the same dataset mixture and then evaluate the resulting policies in the SIMPLER environment [32]. Compared to other two approaches, our method achieves significantly higher performance, validating the effectiveness of our design for incorporating latent actions into VLA pre-training. given a starting image and a language instruction (e.g., “touch the corn”), ACT-latent first generates a sequence of latent actions. Then a separately trained world model is used to render this sequence into a video, allowing us to verify the effectiveness of the plan. Except where noted ( ∗), all models follow a two-stage pretraining–finetuning protocol, including a general pretraining phase on large-scale mixed data, followed by finetuning on a dataset of specific embodiment. Methods marked with ∗ are evalu- ated directly after pretraining, whereas other methods are evaluated after post-training on corresponding dataset. Moreover, our approach outperforms other video learning and latent-action methods, indicating that our specific mechanism for leveraging video data is more effective. Table 3 demonstrates that our method outperforms existing baselines. Overall, our method exhibits superior performance in both simulated environments and real-world robotic tasks. A Vision-Language-Latent-Action Model A Additional Implementation Details for LAM In this appendix, we provide extended information on the architecture, training protocols, and inference behavior for our Latent Action Model (LAM). A.1 Architecture Overview Our LAM comprises four main modules: While the model inter- nally uses discrete token indices during training, the continuous codebook centers are used in downstream modules. First, the vision–language encoder is based on PaliGemma [3], a 3B-parameter VLM pretrained with 224 × 224 images and 128-token text inputs. Method Visual FDM loss (↓) Proprio FDM