REAL METHOD of "PERK: Long-Context Reasoning as Parameter-Efficient Test-Time Learning" (arXiv 2507.06415v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we propose PERK (ParameterEfficient Reasoning overKnowledge), a scalable approach for learning to encode long con- texts using gradient updates at test time. The inner loop rapidly encodes con- texts into a low-rank adapter (LoRA) that serves as a parameter-efficient memory module for the base model. The original context is then discarded in this answering step as it is now encoded parametrically by the model. However, bi-level optimization algorithms for training test-time learning methods entail prohibitive memory overhead (Finn et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2023b; Hu et al., 2023), particularly when updating all model parameters, because they require backpropagating through a complete multi-step optimization trajectory. 2 BACKGROUND ANDPRELIMINARIES Causal Language Models.Causal language models(CLM) fθ (Radford & Narasimhan, 2018) with parameters θ are typically trained with an autoregressive learning objective such as thetoken-level negative log-likelihood(NLL). Reasoning as Test-time Learning.In this setting, models simulate reasoning by first encoding the given context K into a CLM’s parameters θ, and then using the updated parameters ϕ(θ,K) to generate a response to the given question q (Chen et al., 2023b). The context is encoded by adapting the model’s parameters using a CLM objective over the context: CLMs can store and retrieve diverse information in their parameters from pre-training (Roberts et al., 2020; Bayazit et al., 2024). CLMs may reason better with knowledge in their parameters than in context, motivating methods that encode new context parametrically for reasoning. 2 Preprint Under Review Figure 1:Meta-learning PERK for long-context reasoning.The training procedure involves a nested inner and outer loop. Training a CLM for Test-time Learning.Given a distribution R of possible reasoning problems, the optimal parameters θ∗ for a test-time learning CLM minimize the expected reasoning loss of the CLM’s adaptation to each reasoning problemr∼R: Meta-learning algorithms, such as MAML (Finn et al., 2017), can be used for training effective test-time learning methods. the outer loopsamples batches of reasoning problems from a training dataset of reasoning problems, the inner loopobtains the adaptations of θ to each problem’s contextK, and theouter loopthen optimizes the meta-parameters based on the performance of each fϕ(θ,K) on the corresponding questions. META-LEARNINGPARAMETER-EFFICIENTREASONING OVER KNOWLEDGE We propose PERK, a bi-level optimization algorithm for model reasoning via test-time adaptation for any given long context. Test-Time Learning and Inner Loop Training.We set the test time learning objective (thus also the inner loop objective) to causal language modeling of the context: The adaptation algorithm computes the gradient ∇LNLL on a batch of sub-sequences from the full context sequence K. The exact manner by which K is broken into batches is a hyperparameter of the algorithm, and for efficiency reasons, we set it to one batch during training. 3 Preprint Under Review Outer Loop Training.In the outer loop, the model learns to reason over the encoded information in the adapter (memory scratchpad) given a problem q without access to the long context K explicitly in the text space. 3.2 SCALABLEMETA-LEARNING WITHTRUNCATEDGRADIENTUNROLLING To optimize Equation (3) with gradient-based methods, we need to differentiate through Alg, which involves higher-order derivatives and saving the complete trajectory to compute the meta-gradient (i.e., the gradient of Lreason). In vanilla MAML, to compute the gradient of the outer-loop loss Lreason with respect to the meta- parameters θadapter, one backpropagates through all N inner steps. Truncated Gradient Unrolling (TGU).To reduce memory, we follow (Shaban et al., 2019) and run the inner loop for all N specified update steps, but only store the computational graph for the last T≪N steps. Recall (retrieve attributes by ID), Relation (compare attributes between IDs), and Aggregate (compute max/min/average grades). Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct-1M (1M context via long-context pretraining, progressive length extension, and long-instruction post-training; Yang et al., 2025) and ProLong-Llama-3-8B-512k-Instruct (512K context; Gao et al., 2025a). When comparing similar training settings (i.e., training on 8k contexts),PERK (Qwen-7B) achieves a higher accuracy across all task complexities than FT-ICR (Qwen-7B) with an in-distribution context window of 8K at evaluation time. We also compare PERK to recent training-free length generalization methods, Yarn (Peng et al., 2023b) and Dual Chunk Attention (DCA; An et al., 2024a) by applying these techniques to the FT-ICR Qwen model at inference time. FT-ICR’s performance drops drastically as the inference context length exceeds the training context length, especially for shorter training contexts. After applying the training-free length generalization methods, Yarn and DCA, to FT-ICR Qwen models, the baselines show improved generalization on the extreme contexts. We note, as well, that PERK is only trained on contexts with 8K tokens, while the Qwen-1M and ProLong models have been trained on much longer contexts with 256K and 512K tokens. We test for both test lengths shorter than the training length, and test lengths longer than the training length. AlthoughPERKunderperforms FT-ICR when the train-test positions are the same and the beginning (Pre) or end (Post) of the context, performance remains consistent regardless of the positional distribution shift between train and test time. Other methods achieve test-time learning in the model architecture. Building on Titan, ATLAS (Behrouz et al., 2025) proposes a new transformer architecture that contains the differentiable memory module as part of the network to support large- scale distributed pretraining. Our method,PERK, introduces parameter-efficient meta-learning using lightweight adapters, improving scalability for long contexts. Long-Context Architectures.In parallel, there have been many efforts in designing more efficient architectures, for example, linear attention with RNNs (Chandrayan et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023a; Gu & Dao, 2024; Dao & Gu, 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Beck et al., 2024) and alternative attention architectures (Rubin & Berant, 2024; Sun et al., 2024; Han et al., 2023). In comparison, PERK directly augments off-the-shelf pre-trained LLMs without requiring additional architecture modifications or extensive 