REAL METHOD of "Adaptive Social Learning via Mode Policy Optimization for Language Agents" (arXiv 2505.02156v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We then develop theAdaptiveModePolicyOptimization (AMPO) algorithm to learn the context-aware mode adaptation and reasoning. (1) End-to-end goal-oriented training, which involves LLM post-training through supervised learning (Wang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025a), and (2) External planning integration, augmenting agents with plug-and-play planning modules (Deng et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2025a). For RL-based enhancement, we contrapuntally develop theAdaptiveModePolicyOptimization (AMPO) algorithm, which incorporates the mode-level and sample-level information into advantage estimation to strengthen the context-aware reasoning mode switching. (1) We propose ASL, the first adaptive social learning framework for language agents, which consists of hierarchical reasoning modes and tailor- designed reinforcement learning to empower language agents with adaptive reasoning ability in rich social context. First, inspired by Hierarchical Cognitive Control Theory, we design specialized reasoning modes that structure the social agent’s cognitive processes (§2.2). Demonstration of ourAdaptive Social Learningframework, which consists of three steps: The objective for each agent is to learn a policyπ i that maximizes its expected terminal reward:E τ∼π i,π−i [Ri(sT )]. For each reasoning mode, we design specific and suitable actions aligned with linguistic principles: The LLM is thus to first generate the appropriate mode token and then produce a reasoning path consistent with that mode. For instance, a ”step-by-step reasoning” response and a ”direct response” are evaluated by GRPO solely based on their final reward ri. 2.4.1 REWARD SHAPING To provide a clear learning signal, the reward ri for each sample is carefully shaped and consists of three components: 2.4.3 POLICYOPTIMIZATION With the dual-level advantage defined, the AMPO objective function integrates it into a PPO-style objective (Schulman et al., 2017; Shao et al., 2024). Given a diverse corpus of social state S={s 1, s2, ..., sn} where sn represents the current social context, including dialogue history and private information, the policy πθ generates G samples o∼π θ(·|s) for each social context. 3 EXPERIMENTS 3.1 EXPERIMENTALSETTINGS Baselines.Our method, implemented on both Qwen and Llama backbones, is evaluated against several baselines: Benchmarks.We evaluate our method on SOTOPIA and SOTOPIA-Hard (Zhou et al., 2024). (1) End-to-end goal-oriented training(e.g., SOTOPIA-π (Wang et al., 2024), DSI (Zhang et al., 2025a)) improves social skills but lacks explicit strategy guidance, and (2) External planners (e.g., PPDPP (Deng et al., 2024), DAT (Li et al., 2024a), EPO (Liu et al., 2025a)) provide supervision but do not strengthen internal planning capabilities. To enhance the context-aware mode switching and reasoning, we introduce the Adaptive Mode Policy Optimization (AMPO) algorithm, which integrates both mode- and sample-level information into advantage estimation. A social interaction example from SOTOPIA, comparing our method with existing ap- proaches: By engaging in moderate reasoning before responding, our method is able to pursue social goals more effectively. The code encompasses comprehensive training details for mode behavioral cloning and adaptive mode policy optimization, while the datasets include the BC and RL training data used in our experiments. The core advantage of this approach lies in achieving comprehensive coverage of the dialogue state space through turn-level exploration while significantly reducing training complexity to enable large-scale training. D.3 ADDITIONALEFFICIENTREASONINGBASELINE To further assess the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct comparisons with a set of rep- resentative reasoning-efficiency methods originally proposed to mitigate overthinking. To the best of our knowledge, AMPO is the first method specifically tailored to optimize reasoning efficiency in social interaction tasks. Without accurate, fine-grained rewards for each turn, reward-shaping methods become much less effective for adaptive reasoning in such settings. Different judges exhibit distinct scoring tendencies due to variations in pretraining corpora, model architectures, and alignment procedures–a phenomenon well-documented in existing LLM evaluation research (Zheng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025). 21 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1Adaptive Social Learning Optimization Procedure Inputinitial policy model πθinit; reward models rϕ; training data for BC Dbc;task prompts for RL Drl; BC training epochsE; RL training stepsM; 1: Compute BC loss:L BC =−E (x,y)∼Db hP|y| t=1 logπ θ(yt |x, y1:t−1) i 6: Compute sample-level rewards{r m(i) i }G i=1 for each sampled outputo m(i) i by runningr ϕ 15: Compute mode-level information{¯r Mi }N i=1 and{ ¯lMi }N i=1 for each reasoning modeM i 16: For each answerai, the reward is computed based on the difference gi between the goal completion scores before and after the response. To ensure training stability, we design a boundary-aware scaling function that dynamically adjusts the magnitude of difference based on the distance from the current score to the boundaries while mapping the scaled difference to the [0,1]interval through a linear transformation: G DETAILS OFEXPERIMENTALIMPLEMENTATIONS G.1 TRAININGPROCEDURE The full optimization procedure is shown in Algorithm 1. In this paper, by using four pre-defined reasoning modes, we employ the expert model to collect training data through self-chat interactions in the SOTOPIA-π (Wang et al., 2024) training environment. The reward model then evaluates each sampled instance and assigns reward signals accordingly. During RL, we use RL training data for online training within the verl framework (Sheng et al., 2024). G.2 TRAININGDATACOLLECTION We collect training data through self-chat interactions in the SOTOPIA- π training environment. For each scenario in both sets, we use 5 different role pairs, resulting in 500 training tasks for BC and 1,550 training tasks for RL. We finally collect 4000 BC training data and 2057 RL training queries. Training Phase Hyper-parameter Value BC Batch Size 32 Training Epochs 3 Learning Rate 2e-6 Max Sequence Length 8192 Learning Scheduler cosine Warmup Ratio 0.1 RL Batch Size 16 Max Prompt Length 6144 Max Response Length 2048 KL Loss Coef 0.001 KL Coef 0.001 Rollout N 16 Training Episodes 800 Learning Rate 3e-7 Table 11: PPDPPWe follow the two-stage training procedure 