REAL METHOD of "ActiveCQ: Active Estimation of Causal Quantities" (arXiv 2509.24293v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Finally, we evaluate our method on the ActiveCQ task through several simulations and a semi-synthetic dataset, demonstrating that our approach significantly outperforms baseline methods (Sec. Given training dataset DT ={a T ,Z T ,S T ,y T}, we compute the posterior GP. (4) CDE-based method.To approximate the posterior mean and covariance, we employ a sampling- based method. Specifically, we first sample ns points {s(1),⋯,s (ns)} from Ps∣z and{s ′(1),⋯, s′(ns)}fromP s∣z′, then compute the posterior mean and covariance as follows: Detailed implementations as well as the hyper-parameters of the baseline methods and our proposed methods, are provided in App. All results are reported as the mean ± standard deviation, computed over20independent random test set runs for each configuration. For ATE, all methods, including the baselines, sample from the entire population, leading to similar performance among the uncertainty-aware methods, all of which outperform random acquisition. We also observe that in the ATE with DS case, all our proposed methods significantly outperform the baseline methods, due to the distribution shift between the target and sampling distributions. Additional ablation results on the stability of our methods, considering factors such asdifferent starting points, pool dataset sizes, batch sizes, and kernel choices,are provided in App. While baseline methods that use naive top- b selection per acquisition round are slightly faster, our approaches incur additional cost due to learning conditional distributions. Under this assumption, information gain-based methods naturally select the most informative points from the pool dataset, aligning effectively with the learning objective. (2025) were the first to explicitly point out that BALD-based active causal estimation methods suffer from a fundamental objective mismatch: Active Estimation of Causal Quantities Distinct Methodological Contributions.The methodological foundations of the two frameworks are also markedly different. Ultimately, the methods pursue different objectives under incompatible assumptions and are not methodologically comparable. C.1 DERIVATION FOR THECATE Here, we provides a detailed, step-by-step derivation for the posterior mean ν(a,z) and covariance q((a,z),(a ′,z′)) of the CATE estimator, as presented in Prop. Detailed Derivation.The following equations show the step-by-step expansion of the GP posterior formulas. Proposition 3(ATT Estimator Posterior).Given the training dataset DT ={a T ,S T ,y T} and the full input set D={a,S} , if f(a,s) is the posterior GP learned from DT , then the ATT estimator ˆτATT(a,˜a)follows a GP ,ˆτATT∼GP(ν(a,˜a), q((a,˜a),(a′,˜a′))). Active Estimation of Causal Quantities Detailed Derivation.The following equations show the step-by-step expansion of the GP posterior formulas. Note that the CME for the distribution of s given a is estimated using the full dataset (a,S ), whereas the final GP regression for f is conditioned on the labeled training set (aT ,S T ,y T ). Detailed Derivation.The following equations show the step-by-step expansion of the GP posterior formulas. In contrast, our method estimates an average over a distribution, shifting the emphasis from individual points to distributional estimation. This includes a comprehensive description of the data generation process, as well as the implementation details for both the baseline methods and our proposed methods. We evaluate all methods on both the in-distribution training set and the testing set. First, we concatenate the conditional variable with the first three adjustment variable to form the random vector x, and the weight vectorβis defined as: For the ATE under distribution shift, we define the target distribution as z∼Uniform(−1,1), ⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ s1 =Uniform(−1,1) s2 =Uniform(−0.5,0) s3 =Uniform(0,0.5) (77) E.1.3 SEMI-SYNTHETICDATASETS IHDP.The IHDP dataset, derived from a randomized controlled trial, is widely used in causal inference to benchmark methods for estimating treatment effects. The potential outcomes are pre-computed using established econometric methods, enabling ground-truth calculations of ATE and CATE. Active Estimation of Causal Quantities E.2 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS E.2.1 GENERALSETTING Validation dataset.In the simulation dataset, we change the seed to sample a validation set from the same data generation process as the training dataset, ensuring that the observations in the validation set share the same distribution as the training data. In the real world dataset IHDP, we directly random segment the trainging dataset into training set and validation set. Trial Setup.For each trial, we initiated the process with a warm-start size, and the data for each experiment were randomly sampled from the pool dataset. This random sampling was done to ensure variability in the experiments and to evaluate the robustness of our methods under different initial conditions. Visualization.In the visualization experiment, the warm-start size was set to 20, and the acquisition step was set to5, meaning that data acquisition occurred in steps of 5 data points. E.2.3 BASELINEMETHODS We use existing implementations for most of the baseline methods: Total variance reduction:For this method, we directly compute the posterior variance for all data points in the pool dataset (MacKay, 1992). For all baseline methods, to ensure a fair comparison, we use the same training configuration for the GP regression function as in our proposed method, including the learning rate, number of epochs, and validation dataset, as detailed in the implementation part as discussed above. Initial labeled dataset DT ={(x i, yi)}nT i=1, Pool of unlabeled data DP ={x i}N i=nT+1, Query budgetn B, Batch sizen b, Utility functionU(⋅) Ensure:Final trained CATE modelˆτ 1:Train initial CATE modelˆτ 0 onD T . # Train a baseline model 2:forr=1ton B/nb do# Main active learning loop for each round 3:Letˆτ current =ˆτr−1. For instance, BALD-based methods target the uncertainty in model parameters (θ), whereas our method targets the posterior variance of the causal quantity (τ) itself. Evaluating all methods using any single, internal uncertainty measure would unfairly favor the method that directly optimizes that specific measure. O(n2 T ⋅m MC+m 2 MC).(92) • CME-based Method:The CME method analytically handles the integral, avoiding the need for sampling. Acquisition Function Evaluation.After obtaining the m×m posterior covariance matrix Στ for th