REAL METHOD of "Online Conformal Prediction with Adversarial Feedback via Regret Minimization" (arXiv 2604.17984v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Online conformal prediction is a principled online uncertainty quantification method that dynamically constructs a prediction set at each time step. In this paper, we propose a novel learning method for online conformal prediction withpartial feedbackfrom an adaptive adversary—a more challenging setup where the true label is revealed only when it lies inside the constructed prediction set. Building on an existing algorithm for adversarial bandits, our method achieves a long-run coverage guarantee by explicitly establishing its connection to the regret of the learner. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in both independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) and non-i.i.d. Unlike point prediction methods that return the most likely outcome, conformal prediction (V ovk et al., 2005) is a promising uncertainty quantification method that constructs aconformal setfor a given input, a set of outcomes that is guaranteed to contain the true label with a user-specified probability. Even in adversarial settings, where no distributional assumptions are made on the data stream or on the functional form of the scoring functions, these methods provide a long-run coverage guarantee such that the empirical coverage reaches the target level after sufficiently many time steps. Meanwhile, existing methods for online conformal prediction typically assume afull feedback scenario, where the true label is revealed every time step. Indeed, these methods are tailored to the full feedback setting, since they require a scoring function evaluated on the true label either for its quantile estimation or for the evaluation of the miscoverage loss over multiple conformal set candidates. Building on the EXP3.P algorithm, we propose a novel algorithm for online conformal prediction with adversarial partial feedback, in which we consider a semi-bandit feedback scenario, similar to Ge et al. Specifically, by devising a loss function tailored to conformal prediction, we explicitly establish a connection between the regret of the learner and a long-run coverage (Lemma 1), which in turn provides a long-run coverage guarantee of our algorithm. We empirically demonstrate the efficacy of our method on both classification and regression tasks, conducting experiments in i.i.d. In particular, we show that our method approaches long-run coverage while maintaining a moderate average conformal set size, achieving performance comparable to Bastani et al. 2 RELATEDWORK 2.1 ONLINECONFORMALPREDICTION Gibbs & Candès (2021) first proposed an online conformal prediction method for arbitrary data streams. While the method relies only on a single step size parameter, the optimal parameter requires knowledge of the degree of distribution shift, which is an unrealistic assumption. The same authors have resolved the issue by aggregating results from multiple experts, running in parallel with different step sizes, making the method adaptive to the type of distribution shift in a data-driven manner Gibbs & Candès (2024). (2023) extended existing online gradient descent-based methods by incorporating online gradient descent steps, which they refer to as quantile tracking, as one of the components for the online quantile update. 2.2 ONLINECONFORMALPREDICTION WITHPARTIALFEEDBACK Existing methods for online conformal prediction with adversarial feedback typically assume the full feedback setting, where the true label is revealed at every time step. However, the authors are basically considering a full feedback scenario, and some of their theoretical results assume a problem setup where the scoring function is trained online, using the labeled data pairs from previous time steps. Defining a finely discretized subset Π of the continuous hypothesis space [0,1] as an action space, we improve the EXP3.P algorithm (Auer et al., 2002), which is an algorithm that provides a high-probability sublinear regret under adversarial bandit environments, for conformal prediction. To this end, we first design a loss function tailored to conformal prediction (Section 4.2), which in turn provides an explicit learner-agnostic relationship between a regret from a learner and its miscoverage rate MC(T) (Section 4.3). Specifically, for each time step t, a learner chooses a threshold parameter πt from K possible candidates, where K :=|Π| is defined as the discretization level of the original hypothesis space [0,1] . (ℓt(π))π∈Π Feedback Miscoverage:m t(πt) True Label:y t ifm t(πt) = 0 Loss:ℓ t(πt) Loss Defined by Learner and Adversary Adversary Objective Miscoverage Rate:MC(T) Inefficiency:Ineff(T) Regret:Reg(T) Here, ℓt := (ℓ t(π))π∈Π ∈ [ℓmin, ℓmax]K is a loss vec- tor chosen by an adversary at time t, with each entry lying in the bounded inter- val [ℓmin, ℓmax]. 4.2 DESIGN OF THELOSSFUNCTION In online conformal prediction with adversarial feedback, the only feedback we observe at each time step t is on the miscoverage mt(πt) of the chosen threshold πt. Therefore, we define a loss function composed of a miscoverage term and an inefficiency term, capturing the miscoverage and the size of a conformal set, respectively, as follows: 4.4 TAILORINGEXP3.PFORONLINECONFORMALPREDICTION We propose modifications to the EXP3.P algorithm tailored to online conformal prediction with adversarial partial feedback. Since EXP3.P-based algorithms are formulated in terms of gains, we additionally introduce a normalized gain termgt(π)∈[0,1] , defined as gt(π) := ℓmax −ℓ t(π) ℓmax −ℓ min .(8) OCP-Bandit.It is a direct modification of the EXP3.P algorithm (Algorithm 2) for online conformal prediction with adversarial partial feedback (Algorithm 3). OCP-Unlock+.We propose a novel algorithm that fully exploits the additional information available when mt(πt) = 0 and uses the monotonicity of the miscoverage term mt(π) with respect to the threshold π∈Π to obtain additional feedback when mt(πt) = 1 (Algorithm 1). First, whenm t(πt) = 0, we design the biased gain estimator as follows: Also, for π /∈Π∗ t , we further strengthen this miscoverage-first rationale by placing less weight on the exploration term β for larger conformal sets via the denominatorP ˜π≤πpt(˜π). Since Π∗ t cannot be correctly 7 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1OCP-Unlock+ 1:procedureOCP-UNLOCK+(Π, T, η, γ, β, α, c,(ft)T t=1) 2:Initialize cumulative estimated gain: Observe the true labely t 8:Π t(πt)←Π 9:else(▷)Partial unlocking 10:Π t(πt)← {π∈Π|π≥π t} 11:forπ∈Π t(πt)do(▷)