REAL METHOD of "Much Ado About Noising: Dispelling the Myths of Generative Robotic Control" (arXiv 2512.01809v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose a simple two-stepminimal iterative policy(MIP) whose performance matches that of flow-based GCPs. Instead, we find that their advantage stems fromiterative computation, as long as in- termediate steps are supervised during training and this supervision is paired with a suitable level ofstochasticity. Given the seemingly transformative nature of GCPs for robot learning, there has been much speculation about the origin of their superior performance relative to policies trained with a regression loss, henceforthregression control policies(RCPs). to our knowledge, we are the first work to carefully benchmark expressive architectures popularized for Diffusion (Chi et al., 2023; Dasari et al., 2024) as regression policies. As an algorithmic ablation that only combines C2+C3, we devise aminimal iterative policy(MIP), which invokes only two iterations, one- step of stochasticity during training, and deterministic inference. In applications, it is parameterized by a neural networkπ θ 4 and trained so as to minimize theL 2-loss on training data: For each architecture, we average performance of the best training checkpoint across 3 seeds. Crucially , we implement RCPs using theexact same architecturesas their corresponding flow models by simply setting the noise level and initial noise to zero:z=0,t=0, and study three widely-used architectures (Chi-Transformer, Sudeep-DiT,Chi-UNetas well as pre-trained VLA models likeπ 0 (Black et al., 2024); detailed in Sec- tion B.2). Step-by-step generation is known to drastically increase expressivity in other domains as well, such as autoregressive language models (Li et al., 2024), However, flow-based generative models use their multi-step computation to express complex distri- butions over thegenerated variable(Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a; Zhang & Chen, 2022; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021). starting from dataset statesst with observationo t, we inject small Gaussian per- turbations in the executed action to reach afeasi- blenearby states (i) t+1 with observationo (i) t+1, then measure input–output sensitivity via finite differ- ences of the policy around the perturbed states (full algorithm and per-architecture results in Section C). Component 3.Supervised Iterative Computation (SIC)denotes the iterative refinement of predictions by feeding the previous outputs into the same network again during inference, and providingsupervision signalsat every step of the generation procedure at training time. distributional learning (fitting a distribution), stochasticity injection (injecting noise during training), and supervised iterative computation (mul- tiple generation steps, each with its own supervised learning loss). Two-Step Denoising.As a next step towards GCPs, we now consider atwo-step denoising(TSD) policy . Since we provide supervision for both first stepπ MIP θ (o,I 0 =0,t=0)and second stepπ MIP θ (o,I 0 =I t⋆,t=t ⋆)with ground truth action a,MIPalso exemplifies SIC in its simplest form. Method LIBERO Object LIBERO Goal LIBERO Spatial LIBERO 10 RCP (ℓ2 loss) 92.6 94.6 97.2 78.0 RCP (ℓ1 loss) 95.2 88.0 95.8 62.4 Flow 97.495.0 95.8 81.6 MIP 95.895.2 97.6 82.2 Table 4: To showcase its importance, we ablate the performance of different method’s average performance across both the 3 architectures above, and the more traditionalMLPandRNNarchitectures, implemented with mod- ern best practices including FiLM conditioning (Perez et al., 2018), and skip-connections (He et al., 2016)/LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016) where appropriate (details in Section B.2). 11, the combination of training method and architecture design has a strong yet somewhat erratic effect on both GCPs and RCP performance. The coupling between training and architecture choice highlights the importance of controlling architecture design when comparing across methods. To make the network be able to represent more complex distirbutions, prior to diffusion, non-parametric method like VAEs (Zhao et al., 2023b) was used to parameterize the distribution, trained with reconstruction loss. Similarly , in behavior transformer, a two step policy is introduced to first predict the policy class and then refine it with another network to achieve higher precision control. Residual Regression (RR)removes all stochasticity in training and the training objective is: πMIP-Dagger θ ≈arg min θ E (o,a)∼p train,z∼N(0,I) (∥(πθ (o,I 0 =0,t=0)−t ⋆a)∥2 +∥(πθ (o,t⋆sg(πθ (o,I 0 =0,t=0)) + (1−t ⋆)z,t⋆)−a)∥ 2), where the major difference compared toMIPis the second step takes in the interpolant between first step output and noise rather than the action and noise. MIPwithout intermediate supervision (MIP-NoSupervision)To understand the effect of interme- diate supervision on iterative computation, we propose one variant ofMIPthat removes the supervi- sion of intermediate computation steps while preserving stochasticity injection at training time, named MIP-NoSupervision: πMIP-NoSupervision θ ≈arg min θ E (o,a)∼p train,z∼N(0,I) (∥(πθ (o,t⋆sg(πθ (o,I 0 =0,t=0)) + (1−t ⋆)z,t⋆)−a)∥ 2), where the first step’s output is unsupervised. InMIP-Obs, we perturb the first step’s observation with noisez, while the second step’s training is the same as the originalMIPwith decoupled training. InMIP-Dagger-Obs, we perturb the first step’s observation with noisez, and the second step’s training is conditioned on the first step’s output, making it similar to Dagger. In a two-step model, selecting noise levels that prevent observation overlap becomes challenging and brittle, leading to training instability across architectures. For each methods and architecture, we report the average and best performance across 5 checkpoints with 3 random seeds. observationoare first encoded into observation vectors; the flow timetis embedded viapositional embedding; an encoder–decoder transformer then fuses these with initial noisezto predict next action. The key ingredient ofSudeep-DiTis replacing standard cross- attention withadaLN-Zeroblocks—adaptive LayerNorm modulation using the mean encoder embedding and the time embedding, with zero-initialized output-scale projections—stabilizing diffusion training at scale. Compared toChi-Transformer,Sudeep-DiThas adaLN-based conditioning (instead of vanilla cross-attention) and an explicit encoder-decoder split, yielding better training stability . Figure 12 present the full results across all architectures with different training methods. For each architecture, we average performance of the last 5 t