REAL METHOD of "STORK: Faster Diffusion and Flow Matching Sampling by Resolving both Stiffness and Structure-Dependence" (arXiv 2505.24210v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, prior training- free sampling methods fail to simultaneously address two key challenges: In this work, we introduce the Stabilized Taylor Orthogonal Runge–Kutta (STORK) method, addressing both design con- cerns. Consequently, quality-preserving fast sampling methods have become an active area of research, and many methods that achieve effective sampling with fewer NFEs have been proposed (Song et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Zhang & Chen, 2023; Lu et al., 2022; 2025; Xie et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2023). In this work, we introduce a fast training-free sampler, the Stabilized Taylor Orthogonal Runge–Kutta (STORK) method, built upon stabilized Runge–Kutta (SRK) methods (Ab- dulle, 2002; Meyer et al., 2014; Skaras et al., 2021). “Joker logo with the initials of the letter Q” Only our method has both the Joker logo and the letter Q. Although follow-up works (Lu et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2023) circumvent this limitation using a so-called data prediction step, this approach introduces errors at each step. The arrows indicate that the previously computed velocity is used for first derivative approximations. Euler’s method is used for the first step since there is no previous velocity. EDM (Karras et al., 2022) then tried to solve the issue that the trajectory between image and noise distribution is not straight enough with better training of DMs, and used Heun’s method for solving the ODE. PNDM (Liu et al., 2022) demonstrated that direct utilization of classical Runge–Kutta (RK) methods cannot result in fast sampling, therefore proposed a pseudo-numerical method on the noise manifold, using 4-step Adams-Bashforth and 4-step RK as initial steps. 3 S TABILIZED TAYLOR ORTHOGONAL RUNGE –K UTTA (STORK) We now present our main method Stabilized Taylor Orthogonal Runge–Kutta (STORK), which is based on stabilized Runge–Kutta (SRK) methods (Verwer et al., 1990; Abdulle & Medovikov, 2001; Abdulle, 2002; Meyer et al., 2014; O’Sullivan, 2019; Skaras et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2025). SRK methods in classical numerical analysis use orthogonal polynomials such as the Chebyshev polynomial (Verwer et al., 1990; Abdulle & Medovikov, 2001; Abdulle, 2002) to mitigate the effect of stiffness (Burden & Faires, 2011) and to allow for larger timesteps. However, standard SRK methods require an excessive number of function evaluations (NFEs), so we approximate them and obtain our main methods STORK-2 and STORK-4, described fully as Algorithms 1 and 2 in Appendix E. 3.1 S TABILIZED RUNGE –K UTTA (SRK) METHODS Stabilized Runge–Kutta (SRK) methods is a class of novel explicit solvers in numerical analysis. Loosely speaking, an ODE is stiff if the local change in the solution slope is excessively fast so that large timesteps produce inaccurate or even unstable solutions that blow up, causing failure of typical explicit numerical methods. The SRK methods is a class of single-step, multi-stage methods that are primar- ily designed to allow one to numerically solve stiff ODEs with larger timesteps. In practice, the most widely used SRK methods are the second- order and fourth-order SRK methods (Abdulle & Medovikov, 2001; Abdulle, 2002; Verwer et al., 1990; Meyer et al., 2014; O’Sullivan, 2019; Skaras et al., 2021). Let h denote the timesteps used for solving the flow matching ODE one step from x(t0) to x(t0 − h); in general, h can be non-uniform across different timesteps. An example of the second-order SRK (SRK2) method is called the Runge–Kutta–Gegenbauer (RKG2) method proposed by Skaras et al. 5 Preprint A fourth-order SRK method (SRK4) is the orthogonal Runge–Kutta-Chebyshev method developed by Abdulle (2002). We call an update from Yj−1 to Yj as one sub-step, and an update from x(t0) to x(t0 − h) as one super-step. Classical Runge–Kutta (RK) methods and SRK methods crucially differ in their ability to handle stiffness: With more sub-steps s, RK methods converge with higher order, while SRK methods handle stiffness better. SRK WITH VIRTUAL NFE Despite the success of SRK methods in classical numerical analysis, a fatal issue when applying them on diffusion and flow-matching model sampling is that an s-stage SRK method requires s NFEs for updating 1 super-step. Except for the several initial super-steps (depending on the order of Taylor expansion used), we store the previously computed velocities and use the forward finite-difference method to get an approximation for the derivatives of the noise or velocity up to the desired order. Regarding the initial steps, we use one Euler’s method step followed by 2-step Adams-Bashforth method steps until there are enough points for Taylor expansion approximation. Following from Section 3, unless explicitly mentioned, all the noise-based generations use STORK-4 in Algorithm algorithm 2 with second-order Taylor expansion, and flow-matching-based genera- tions use STORK-4 with first-order Taylor expansion. Euler’s method and Heun’s method are two of the most popular flow matching sampling methods, implemented in diffuser (von Platen et al., 2022). The RKG2 method is our STORK-2 method with exact sub-steps. The region of absolute stability of a numerical method is defined as the set of hλ values such that the numerical method with step size h applied to equation 6 yields a solution that remains bounded. The RKG2 method is the basis for our STORK-2 method; in this plot, 3, 5, and 7 sub-steps are used. The region of absolute stability for Heun’s method, fourth-order Runge–Kutta (RK4) method, and the second-order Runge–Kutta–Gegenbauer (RKG2) with 4 sub-steps are plotted in Figure 8. The RKG2 method, for which the STORK-2 method is derived based on, has a region of absolute stability that contains a much larger portion of the left half complex plane than the Euler, Heun, and RK4 methods. C S TABILIZED RUNGE –KUTTA METHODS We present the derivation of the second-order Runge–Kutta–Gegenbauer (RKG2) method (Skaras et al., 2021) and the fourth order orthogonal Runge–Kutta–Chebyshev (ROCK4) method (Abdulle, 2002). (7) Since we would like to derive a single-step method, the method takes the form of x(t + h) =R(hM )x(t), (8) where h is the timestep size, and R(hM ) is called the stability polynomial. D.1 C OMPARISON BETWEEN STORK AND CLASSICAL RUNGE –K UTTA METHODS When s = 1, STORK-2 and STORK-4 both reduce to Euler’s Method, which is a1-step Runge–Kutta (RK) method. The classical RK methods, such as Heun’s method or RK4, are designed for higher-order accuracy