REAL METHOD of "Random-projection ensemble dimension reduction" (arXiv 2410.04922v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this paper, we propose a new method called random projection ensemble dimension reduction (see Algorithm 1). We also compare the performance of our algorithm with different base re- gression methods. One of the key features of our algorithm is that the output from the singular value decomposition step, namely the diagonal matrix of singular values, provides a measure of relative importance of the corresponding singular vectors. We propose in Algorithm 2 in Section 3.4 to choose the projection dimension by comparing the singular values with those obtained when the group size is one (i.e. A second application of our algorithm (see Algorithm 3) applied to the projected data, can then refine the projection by combining signals and removing irrelevant directions. in Section 2 we formally introduce our statis- tical setting and present our main algorithm, Section 3 focuses on various practical consid- erations and provides recommendations on how to choose the inputs to our algorithm. 2.1 The random projection ensemble dimension reduction algo- rithm In this section, we formally introduce our new procedure for dimension reduction, which is presented in Algorithm 1 below. First, we outline some of the notation used, starting with the notion of a base regression method. Given a data set of n1 covariate-response pairs ((z1, y1), ...,(zn1, yn1)) ∈ (Rd × R)n1, a d-dimensional data-dependent regression method is a measurable function ˆ g : If the desired projection dimension ˆd0 is predetermined, then we retain the first ˆd0 columns and set ˆA0 = (U1, . In some cases, there may be a clear candidate choice of ˆd0, but when an appropriate choice is less obvious, we propose to choose ˆd0 by comparing the output of Algorithm 1 with the corresponding output obtained when M = 1, i.e. To demonstrate how our approach works, we applied Algorithm 1 to the data used 7 in Figure 1. Let QN denote the distribution Qp×1 formed by first generating p independent standard Gaussian random variables and then normalising the row to have unit norm. Indeed, in all the experiments in this subsection, we set n = 200, and the inputs to Algorithm 1 are d = 5, L = 200, M = 200, n1 = ⌈2n/3⌉, the base method ˆg is taken to be the global quadratic least squares estimator (see equation (3) for a formal definition). 3.2 Choice of base regression method The choice of base regression method ˆg ∈ Gd,n1 used in Algorithm 1 depends on two primary factors. First, the method should be computationally efficient, as it will be applied L · M times to different randomly projected datasets. While many alternative base regression methods are available, we focus on these four methods for their balance of flexibility and computational feasibility. The base method is linear least squares, quadratic least squares, Nadaraya-Watson or the MARS algorithm. For Model 2, the flexibility of the nonparametric methods is required to find the signal, and MARS outperforms the Nadarya-Watson base method. 3.3 Choice of L, M and d Our Algorithm 1 combines the results of assessing the empirical performance of the base regression method in a total of L · M · d projection directions. Theorem 1 below compares the sin-theta distance between the first d0 columns of U from the output of Algorithm 1 applied with L projec- tions, with the corresponding output when considering an infinite simulation version of our algorithm which takes “ L = ∞”. , Ud0) denote the first d0 columns of the output of Algorithm 1. The first term in the bound does not depend onL, and can be seem as the infinite simulation error of our method. We set n = 200, with the other inputs to Algorithm 1 being d = 5, M = 10p, n1 = ⌈2n/3⌉, Q = 1 2 Q⊗d C + 1 2 Q⊗d N for the projection distribution, and ˆ g being the MARS algorithm. In fact, an extension of our method given in Section 4 is able to find the majority of the signal in a one dimensional projection using a double application of our procedure. Regarding the projection dimension d, if d is taken to be too small, in particular less than (the unknown) d0, then we will always miss one or more projection directions, as our algorithm will consistently choose only a more dominant dimension reduction direction. With a larger d, it is more likely that we find a projection with some signal, which then leads to good performance in the final aggregation step of our algorithm. In which cases, as mentioned above, they should simply output the first ˆd0 columns of U from the output of Algorithm 1 and set ˆA0 = (U1, . In situations where the desired dimension is unknown, we propose to use the infor- mation contained in the singular values D from the output of Algorithm 1. For the first singular value, this asks that there is a dimension which is more likely to be selected by our algorithm than what happens at random. One perspective of this approach, is that the first application of our algorithm acts as a screening step to select potentially relevant directions, while the second application then combines these directions to yield a lower dimensional projection that still retains a large amount of the signal. In Model 1a, the first application of Algorithm 1 typically identifies that the first two variables are important, but splits this signal across the first two singular vectors. In cases where the initial application of Algorithms 1 and 2 correctly identify the true dimension d0, then there is no benefit to be gained from applying Algorithm 3. The first variant applies Algorithm 1 on its own, and the second variant is the double dimension reduction approach presented in Algorithm 3. Our RPE method here is based on the output from Algorithm 1, with the corresponding projection dimension ˆd0 chosen via Algorithm 2. Our RPE method here is based on the output from Algorithm 1, with the corresponding projection dimension ˆd0 chosen via Algorithm 2. However, our approach still excels in terms of false negatives, outperforming the other methods considered, especially in Model 2, where the competing methods fail to capture the signal directions. Nevertheless, our method remains competitive with the other algorithms considered in these examples. More precisely, we fixed the projection dimension ˆd0, set to either 3 or 10, and then apply the methods described in Section 5.1 using only the training data. We then apply MARS 11 to the projected training data after each method. For the first signal direction, we could apply our Algorithm 1 directly, keeping on