REAL METHOD of "Dual Goal Representations" (arXiv 2510.06714v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Based on this concept, we develop a practical goal representation learning method that can be combined with any existing GCRL algorithm. The objective of GCRL is to train a multi-task policy capable of reaching any target state from any starting state in minimal time. Our method first trains a parameterized goal-conditioned value function with an offline value learning algorithm to compute temporal distances. Then, we take the goal embedding of the learned value function as an approximate representation of the functional, which is then used as a goal representation for the policy. Given a goal- conditioned policyπ(a|s, g) :S × S →∆(A), and a goal-conditioned reward function r(s, g) :S × S →R, we defineVπ(s, g) =Eτ∼p π(τ|s 0=s,g)[P∞ t=0 γtr(st, g)]andQ π(s, a, g) = Eτ∼p π(τ|s 0=s,a0=a,g)[P∞ t=0 γtr(st, g)], whereγ∈(0,1)denotes a discount factor andp π de- notes the trajectory distribution induced by the policy and transition dynamics. Given a goal-conditioned policy,π(a|s, g) :S × S → ∆(A), we define the value and Q functions and temporal distance function similarly as before, but with the modified reward functionr ℓ. Specifically, goal-conditioned IQL trains a parameterized goal-conditioned value functionV(s, g) = f(ψ(s), φ(g)) :S × S →Rand a goal-conditioned Q functionQ(s, a, g) :S × A × S →Rwith the following losses (Kostrikov et al., 2022): Downstream offline goal-conditioned RL.After obtaining a dual goal representationφ, we train a parameterized goal-conditioned policyπ(a|s, φ(g))(and optionally goal-conditioned value func- tions,V GCRL(s, φ(g))andQ GCRL(s, a, φ(g))) with an existing offline GCRL algorithm to per- form downstream goal-conditioned policy learning. Note that the choice of this downstream GCRL algorithm is orthogonal to the one used to approximate the temporal distance in the previous para- graph, and thus our method can be applied to any general GCRL algorithm. We describe the full goal-conditioned RL procedure in Algorithm 1, whereℓ 2 κ denotes the expectile loss with expectileκ(Kostrikov et al., 2022) and ¯Qdenotes the target Q network (Mnih et al., 2013). In this work, we aim to improve the performance and generalizability of goal-reaching agents by learning an effective goal representation (as with prior goal representation learning methods discussed below), which can be orthogonally combined with any existing offline GCRL algorithm. Among representation learning algorithms, our practical method has a resemblance to the successor representations and successor features (Dayan, 1993; Barreto et al., 2017; Touati & Ollivier, 2021; Touati et al., 2023). While the concept of dual goal representations and our theoretical results (Section 3) are, to our knowledge, novel, our practical learning algorithm for dual goal representa- tions (Section 4) bears similarity to several existing algorithms. Some previous works train temporal distance representationsφusing the metric parameterization∥φ(s)−φ(g)∥ 2 with different metric learning algorithms (Sermanet et al., 2018; Steccanella & Jonsson, 2022; Ma et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024a), which can potentially be viewed as variants of dual goal representations with a different ag- gregation function. Our method differs from these works in two ways. However, this method trains the representation withbehavioraltemporal contrastive learning, which does not aim to approximate d∗; in contrast, we train a representation based on theoptimalvalue function (as our theory suggests), and we empirically show that our method leads to substantially better performance in Section 6. Then, we provide ablation studies of our method in Section 6.3 to understand the importance of each component. 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 0 1M Steps 0 50 100Success Rate puzzle-4x5 0 1M Steps 0 50 100 puzzle-4x6 Original Dual Figure 3:Original vs. 6.2 RESULTS ONOGBENCH Next, we evaluate our practical algorithm for dual goal representations (Algorithm 1) on OG- Bench (Park et al., 2025a), a benchmark suite for offline goal-conditioned RL algorithms. Previous goal representation learning algorithms.We compare dual goal representations with five previous goal representation learning methods: VIP (Ma et al., 2023) trains metric-based goal representa- tions with a goal-conditioned value learning algorithm. Downstream offline GCRL algorithms.We measure the effectiveness of goal representations by training a parameterized goal-conditioned policyπ(a|s, φ(g))with downstream offline GCRL al- gorithms, as described in Algorithm 1. 6.2.1 RESULTS ONSTATE-BASEDTASKS We report the performance of six goal representation learning methods combined with three down- stream GCRL algorithms (18combinations in total) on13state-based OGBench environments in Table 1 above and Tables 6 and 7 in Section C. These results suggest that our dual goal represen- tations achieve the best average performance in all three settings, outperforming both the previous 7 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 1:Results on state-based tasks with GCIVL as the downstream algorithm.Our dual goal represen- tation mostly achieves the best performance among goal representation learning methods. Notably, our method performs particularly well oncubetasks, in some cases improving performance by3×compared to the “original” baseline (Table 6). Moreover, unlike previous algorithms such as VIB, VIP, and TRA, our method shows the least sensitivity to the choice of downstream offline GCRL algorithms. Are dual goal representations indeed robust to noise? 0 1M Steps 0 20 40Success Rate antmaze-large 0 1M Steps 0 20 cube-double 0 1M Steps 0 50 scene-play Original Dual Figure 4:Dual representations are robust to noise. Environment Dual (Direct) Dual antmaze-large 58±628±2 humanoidmaze-medium 17±328±2 antsoccer-arena 16±421±2 cube-double 42±449±3 scene-play 50±471±6 puzzle-4x4 13±124±3 A:In our offline GCRL recipe (Algorithm 1), we traintwogoal-conditioned value func- tions:f(ψ(s), φ(g))for approximating tem- poral distances to learn a dual representation, andV GCRL(s, φ(g))for performing down- stream GCRL. B ALGORITHMS In this section, we describe the representation learning methods and downstream offline GCRL algorithms considered in our experiments. 14 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 B.1 PRIORREPRESENTATIONLEARNINGALGORITHMS VIB (Shah et al., 2021; Park et al., 2023).VIB trains a goal representation based on informa- tion bottleneck (Tishby et al., 1999; Alemi et al., 201