REAL METHOD of "Autoencoding-Free Context Compression for LLMs via Contextual Semantic Anchors" (arXiv 2510.08907v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Existing methods primarily rely on autoencoding tasks to train special compres- sion tokens to represent contextual semantics. Based on this observation, we propose Semantic-Anchor Compression (SAC), a novel method that shifts from autoencoding task based compression to an architecture that is equipped with this compression capabilitya priori. The training uses (a) Autoencoding task and (b) Language modeling task to pretrain the encoder, then finetunes on (c) Question answering task. However, while the model learns to reconstruct contexts from compression tokens through the AE task, such reconstruction objective can misalign with actual objectives (e.g. is it possible to design a compression architecture that inherently understands context without a demanding AE phase? To answer this question, our work introduces Semantic-Anchor Compression (SAC) (Figure 2), a novel architecture for the context compression task. Furthermore, to enhance their compression capabilities, we modify the standard causal attention to a bidirectional attention mechanism. Results also show that 1) our proposed method consistently improves over strong baselines across different compress ratios, 2) our proposed architecture achieves its best performance in a simpler training setting without autoencoding training, arguably because the anchor tokens already contain enough information about the original context. 2 RELATEDWORKS 2.1 COMPRESSION METHOD Many methods focus on reducing prompt lengths to improve LLM inference speed. Here, ˜M can represent either the output from the final layer of the LLM or the key-value pairs across all transformer layers, which are later used as compressed representations for LLM inference. ICAE (Ge et al., 2024) formulates context compression as training a general encoder that compresses contexts into compact representations understandable by target LLMs without finetuning target LLMs. To train the encoder, ICAE introduces autoencoding tasks and performs joint pretraining with language modeling tasks, followed by finetuning on downstream tasks. 500xCompressor (Li et al., 2025b) improves upon ICAE by replacing the compression carrier from the last layer output of compression tokens with KV values at each layer, achieving higher compression ratios. Our proposed SAC can be seen as a combination of token selection methods and compressed token training methods: it derives and train compressed representations that are based on tokens selected directly from the context and indeed is compatible with the token selection methods above. 2.2 BIDIRECTIONALATTENTION Recent studies have shown that, removing the decoder’s unidirectional causal constraint and intro- ducing bidirectional attention can effectively enhance the model’s representational capacity (Wang et al., 2020). For instance, NV-Embed (Lee et al., 2025) replaces causal attention with bidirectional attention during contrastive training, achieving strong performance on general text embedding and dense vector retrieval tasks. To train the encoder E to effectively extract contextual information, ICAE introduces three objective functions. During pretraining, LAE and LLM are jointly optimized to obtain an initially effective encoderE. 3.2 SEMANTIC-ANCHORCOMPRESSOR A key distinction between our approach Semantic-Anchor Compression (SAC) and previous methods is that we derive compressed representations directly from selected context tokens, as shown in Figure 2. We notice that because the encoder uses causal attention, the anchor tokens S do not have visibility to the full sentence, limiting their representation power. Hence in SAC, we modify the LLM to replace causal attention with bidirectional attention (see Figure 3b), to enhance the LLM’s encoding capability. ˜M can be either the output of anchor tokens from the LLM’s final layer or the key-value pairs from each layer. For the encoder, we adopt the same language model as the decoder and leverage the original context’s KV cache, enabling the decoder to comprehend the compressed representation more readily without requiring additional semantic alignment.1 During pretraining, we only use LLM and do not use LAE to train the compressor. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 the i-th token of the context anchor embedding anchor token ＋ (a) semantic anchor embedding 𝑒𝐴 𝑒𝐴 Emb( )𝑐1 𝑐2 𝑐3 𝑐4 𝑐5 𝑐6 𝑒1 𝑒2 𝑒3 𝑒4 𝑒5 𝑒6 (b) bidirectional attention 𝑒1 𝑒2 𝑒3 𝑒4 𝑒5 𝑒6 ෪𝑀 𝑒𝐴 𝑐𝑖 compressed representation෪𝑀 attention flow Figure 3: (b) The encoder in SAC adopts bidirectional attention, while the decoder operates with causal attention. We equip the encoder with trainable LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) adapters (rank = 128, α= 256 ), while the target LLM parameters remain frozen. pretraining for 20,000 optimization steps followed by finetuning for an additional 20,000 steps, both conducted with a batch size of 16. We compare our method against several context compression techniques: To ensure a fair comparison, all these soft compression baselines are trained using the same experimental settings and data as our SAC method. 4.3 ABLATIONSTUDIES In this subsection, we first show ablation studies on two SAC key components, namely anchor embeddings and bidirectional attentions. The experimental results show that training with only the AE objective leads to a substantial performance drop, and even when combined with the LM objective, the performance remains inferior to that of the full SAC model. Because EPL is trained with AE objective, the results suggest that removing the AE objective for SAC does not impair the model’s capability to model long contexts. Intuitive Perspective.The AE objective requires the compressed representations to reconstruct the complete context, forcing the model to encode a large number of tokens within its limited capacity; some tokens might require significant model memories while not useful for downstream tasks, thereby weakening model’s ability to retain task-critical information. AE-LM Gradient Perspective.In Figure 9, we visualize the gradient cosine similarity between the autoencoding and the language modeling losses during training. 3 5.2 ATTENTIONVISUALIZATION To understand the unique behavior of compressed models, we analyze the attention patterns of the final layer at a 5×compression rate. At a lower 5× compression rate, as shown in Figure 6, SAC attention map presents a clear positive diagonal, indicating that its compressed tokens primarily attend to local tokens, adheri