REAL METHOD of "Universal Properties of Activation Sparsity in Modern Large Language Models" (arXiv 2509.00454v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we introduce a general framework for evaluating sparsity robustness in contemporary LLMs and conduct a systematic investigation of this phenomenon in their feedforward (FFN) layers. However, retrofitting approaches often require additional training and risk degrading model quality during such training, while approximate sparsity approaches lack the principled guarantees of strict sparsity induced by ReLU, require calibration of thresholds, and may overfit to the held-out calibration dataset. Moreover, the literature on sparsity- based acceleration remains fragmented, with different methods targeting various components of the LLM modules, such as feed-forward network (FFN) input (Federici et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025a;b), gate (Song et al., 2024a; Lee et al., 2024), or intermediate activations (Liu et al., 2023; Akhauri et al., 2024). Input-basedmethods skip parts of the matrix multiplications corresponding to the low-magnitude components in the input vectors across all three linear layers.Gate-basedandpredictor-based methods instead omit computations associated with values that are either negligible in the gate activation vector or predicted to be negligible by an auxiliary predictor module. To induce sparsity, we propose a straightforward top-p method, applicable to any model without architectural assumptions or additional training. We further examine the impact of training strategies on sparsity robustness, highlighting the universal capacity for activation sparsity in pretrained, instruction-tuned, and reasoning models. 2.2 ACTIVATIONVECTORS INGATEDFEEDFORWARDTRANSFORMERLAYERS Transformer blocks consist of attention and feedforward (FFN) sub-blocks (Vaswani et al., 2017). While the original Transformer FFN was composed of two projection layers separated by an ac- tivation function, modern LLMs typically employ FFNs based on the Gated Linear Unit (GLU) architecture (Shazeer, 2020), which can be expressed as: Input-based methods(Federici et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025a;b) select a subset of input activations for each linear layer and skip the operations corresponding to masked out multiplications. Since input vectors might lack natural sparsity, e.g., from activation functions, these methods calibrate skip thresholds or use heuristics to identify redundant activations.Gate-based methods(Lee et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024a) exploit sparsity based on the gate activation vector. Since these computational gains are already well-established, our work instead focuses on developing a broader understanding of activation sparsity across modules and model architectures. To study the general impact of sparsification on FFN layers, we propose to use a simple top-p sparsification rule, where we obtain a sparsity mask mp from the largest-magnitude entries in v whose absolute values sum to at least a fraction p of the vector’s total L1 norm: Crucially, it can be applied to any FFN module without requiring auxiliary training or calibration, which enables a fair comparison of models and modules. To measure the relation between sparsity and model performance for a given activation type from Section 2.2 (input, gate, up-projection, intermediate, or all inputs), we apply the top-p rule uniformly across all layers over a range of thresholdsp. For each threshold, we then measure the average induced sparsity and the corresponding performance drop, thereby obtaining the empirical relationship. In this experiment, we do not sparsify activations, and instead compute their effective rank across layers and report the mean value. 4.4 MODELTRAINING ANDROBUSTNESS TOACTIVATIONSPARSITY As established in the previous section, the model’s activation sparsity depends on its architecture, size, sparsification method, and downstream task. Critical sparsity in pretrained and instruction-tuned models.We analyze average critical sparsity achieved across our task suite for pretrained Gemma3 models with that of instruction-tuned variants in Figure 5a. At larger scales, instruction-tuned models exhibit greater tolerance to activation sparsity, indicating that the training recipe can substantially influence robustness even when the underlying architecture is unchanged. The differences between pretrained and instruction-tuned models are consistent across all tested architectures, with detailed results provided in Section B. However, the performance of the reasoning model on MMLU-Redux degrades more sharply, as higher sparsity tends to lengthen outputs, causing them to exceed the maximum generation limit imposed by our compute constraints. Our results demonstrate that activation sparsity consistently emerges across multiple post-trained models, independent of their training recipe. In these architectures, a sparse MoE layer replaces the standard FFN block with multiple experts, only a small subset of which is selected for any given input. Although 7 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Layer 50 60 70 80 90 100Critical Sparsity All Inputs 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Layer Intermediate (a) Critical sparsity across Qwen3-30B-A3B layers. 0 256 512 768 1024 Diffusion Step 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100Sparsity All-Inputs 0 256 512 768 1024 Diffusion Step Intermediate Layer 0 1 2 8 12 16 24 30 31 Avg (b) Activation sparsity across the diffusion steps. We show the critical sparsity for each layer averaged over experts, alongside the minimum and maximum values across 128 experts in each layer. Interestingly, both early and late layers demonstrate the highest potential for sparsification, whereas middle layers exhibit slightly lower critical sparsity. Using our standard evaluation suite, we measure the average critical sparsity across experts in each layer, along with the per-layer minimum and maximum sparsity of any single expert and the corresponding variance. While layer-wise average sparsity across the experts stays relatively stable, individual experts within each layer exhibit notably higher, outlier sparsity levels. Masked diffusion LLMs generate full sequences in parallel by progressively de- noising across multiple diffusion steps, with each step producing distinct intermediate activations. Average critical sparsity 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 0 256 512 768 1024 Diffusion Step 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Jaccard Similarity Input layers 0 256 512 768 1024 Diffusion Step Intermediate layers All-Inputs Intermediate Consecutive Drift (a) Jaccard similarities in each diffusion