REAL METHOD of "LiveWeb-IE: A Benchmark For Online Web Information Extraction" (arXiv 2603.13773v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

A BENCHMARKFORONLINEWEBIN- FORMATIONEXTRACTION Seungbin Yang♡♢∗ Jihwan Kim♡∗ Jaemin Choi♠ Dongjin Kim♡ Soyoung Yang♡ ChaeHun Park♡ Jaegul Choo♡ ♡KAIST AI ♢Letsur ♠School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University {sby99, jihvvan.kim, dj kim, sy yang, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr jaeminld@cau.ac.kr, qkrcogns2222@gmail.com ABSTRACT Web information extraction (WIE) is the task of automatically extracting data from web pages, offering high utility for various applications. To bridge this gap, we introduce LIVEWEB-IE, a new benchmark de- signed for evaluating WIE systems directly against live websites. In addition, we propose Visual Grounding Scraper (VGS), a novel multi-stage agentic framework that mimics human cog- nitive processes by visually narrowing down web page content to extract desired information. The conventional approach to web information extraction (WIE) has been dominated by wrapper-based methods, which define a set of extraction rules based on the structural patterns of web pages (Ler- man et al., 2003; Reis et al., 2004; Omari et al., 2017). With the advent of large language models (LLMs), language-agent-based methods have been proposed, leveraging LLMs to extract informa- tion directly from web pages (UncleCode, 2024; Lorenzo Padoan, 2024). However, both approaches face significant limitations; wrapper-based methods are often brittle and require substantial human effort to create and maintain Dalvi et al. Our empirical analysis in Appendix F confirms this discrepancy, showing that LLM-based wrapper generation methods suffer an average F1 degradation of over 15% when applied to the structurally evolved versions of the same websites compared to their static snapshots. To fill this gap, we introduce LIVEWEB-IE, a benchmark foronlineweb information extraction designed with four key features:(1) Live web evaluation.While conventional benchmarks eval- uate WIE systems on static HTML snapshots, LIVEWEB-IE mandates evaluation directly on live websites. Specifically, we define this content stability as the temporal persistence of informational content, distinguishing it from layout stability. Extensive experiments on LIVEWEB-IE show that even methods with strong performance on ex- isting benchmarks struggle significantly, especially on complex extraction tasks. As the structure of web pages grows more complex over time (V ogel & Springer, 2022), the evolving nature of the web further amplifies the performance degradation of such methods. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Based on these observations, we propose Visual Grounding Scraper (VGS), a novel multi-stage framework that advances the promising paradigm of generating reusable wrappers. VGS first visually scans the web page to find the re- gion where the information is, and then identifies the specific items within that region. Our method establishes state-of-the-art results not only on our challenging LIVEWEB-IE but also on existing WIE benchmarks. •New Benchmark for Online WIE:We introduce LIVEWEB-IE, a benchmark designed to over- come the limitations ofofflineevaluation by assessing WIE systems ononlinewebsites. •Vision-Based Scraping Framework:We propose VGS, a framework that emulates how hu- mans find information on a web page. VGS visually identifies a relevant region on the web page and then pinpoints the specific target elements to generate accurate wrappers. Consequently, these benchmarks prioritize the evaluation of sequential action execution, which is distinct from the core WIE objective that requires the precise identification and extraction of target information from within DOM structures and visual layouts. WIE Methodology.Early WIE systems mainly studied rule-based wrapper induction systems (Kushmerick, 2000; Wu et al., 2009; Dalvi et al., 2011; Furche et al., 2016). The advent of deep learning introduced a suite of methods to better interpret HTML structures, progressing from se- quence models to more advanced architectures such as FreeDOM (Lin et al., 2020) with its CNN- BLSTM text encoder and WebFormer (Guo et al., 2022), which integrates graph attention into a Transformer framework. The development of pre-trained models specialized for web data, such as MarkupLM (Li et al., 2022), and the incorporation of visual cues with models like WIERT (Li et al., 2023), further enhanced extraction accuracy by understanding HTML semantics and layouts. However, even the state-of-the-art methods struggle on complex web pages, primarily due to an over-reliance on HTML. To fill this gap, we propose VGS, a vision-grounded framework that marks a methodological shift from prior approaches by emulating the human cognitive process and using visual information to sequentially filter out irrelevant noise. We first define the task (§ 3.1), then detail the dataset construction process (§ 3.2), and conclude with a statistical analysis of the benchmark (§ 3.3). 3.1 TASK DEFINITION Formally, given a target URLUand a natural language queryQthat requests the extraction of target attributesA={a 1, . , ak}, the objective is to extract the set of ground-truth valuesV= {v1, . The performance is evaluated by first aligning the inferred attributes ˆAwith the ground-truth at- tributesA, and then comparing the extracted valueˆv i with the ground-truth valuev i. First, we reviewrobots.txtfiles of each site to check crawling policies. We first select a diverse set of websites and group the web pages within each website by layout. We then annotate the attributes, queries, and values for each page group, followed by a human verification process to ensure data quality. Data Annotation.For each page group, we manually curate natural language queries that request the extraction of specific attributes. Each of the five authors annotates queries for three distinct websites, following a structured procedure: First, annotators identify all potential attributes that can be extracted from a given page group, selecting only those corresponding values that are unlikely to change over time. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Retrieve the fanart for this gameh"ps://www.thesportsdb.com/event/1666948-argen;na-vs-france …/1666948-argentina-vs-france Step 3: ˆA=LLM(I a, Q)(1) This step translates the unstructured query into a concrete set of extraction goals, thereby establish- ing a clear objective that guides the entire subsequent process. 4.2 VISUAL GROUNDING Following the attribute identification step, we perform visual groun