REAL METHOD of "Value Flows" (arXiv 2510.07650v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We compare our method (Value Flows) with prior methods in the offline and online-to-online settings. Our work builds on these prior works by using variance to reweight the critic objective (a flow-matching objective in our case), and is most similar to prior methods that do weighting based on aleatoric uncertainty (Kumar et al., 2020a; Schaul et al., 2015). 4.4), where algorithms first pre-train a policy from the offline dataset D and then fine-tune the policy with online interactions in the exactsameenvironment. We will use these two implications to derive our method in Sec. We adopt the simplest flow matching objectives called conditional flow matching (CFM) (Lipman et al., 2023) to construct loss functions for optimizing the return vector field (Sec. 4 VALUE FLOWS In this section, we introduce our method for efficiently estimating the return distribution using an expressive flow-matching model, resulting in an algorithm called Value Flows. We then introduce the update rules for the return vector field, deriving a distributional flow matching loss to fit the discounted return distribution. Our practical algorithm will build upon this distributional flow matching loss and incorporate uncertainty in the return distribution. 4.2 ESTIMATING THE RETURN DISTRIBUTION USING FLOW-MATCHING We start by constructing the update rules for the vector field and the probability density path, and then derive the preliminary flow matching losses to fit the return distribution. We will use these preliminary losses to construct the practical loss used in our algorithm (Sec. This property allows us to first construct update rules for a vector field v(z t |t, s, a)and a probability density path p(zt |t, s, a)separatelyand then relate them via the continuity equation (Eq. The distributional flow matching losses.We now derive the preliminary flow matching losses for estimating the return distribution only using transition samples from the dataset D. Similar to the standard flow matching loss (Lipman et al., 2023), this loss function is not practical because of(1)the unknown transition probability density p(s′ |s, a), and(2)the intractable integral (the expectation) in the vector field vk+1. Unlike the DFM lossL DFM, the DCFM lossL DCFM can be easily estimated via samples from the datasetD. Like the connection between the flow matching loss and the conditional flow matching loss in Lipman et al. (2023), the DCFM loss has the same gradient as the DFM loss, indicating that they have the same minimizer. The resulting loss function, calledbootstrapped conditional flow matching(BCFM) loss LBCFM, resembles the standard fitted Q-learning (Riedmiller, 2005). We incorporate the return uncertainty information into our method and use it to prioritize learning a more accurate return distribution at transitions with higher return variance. Using this variance estimation, we define the confidence weight for reweighting the distributional flow matching losses. We linearize the return prediction around noiseϵusing a Taylor expansion and then compute the variance of this linearization. 4.4 THE COMPLETE ALGORITHM We now discuss the policy extraction strategies based on the flow-based return models and summarize the complete algorithm of Value Flows. Second, for online fine-tuning in offline-to-online RL, following prior work (Park et al., 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1 Value Flowsis an RL algorithm using flow matching to model the return distribution. 2:foreach iterationdo 3:Sample a batch of transitions{(s, a, s ′, r)} ∼ Dand a batch of noises{ϵ} ∼ N(0,1) 4:Compute the confidence weightw(s, a, ϵ)using the Euler method and VJP▷Sec. 4.3 5:Train the return vector fieldv θ by minimizingL Value Flow(θ)▷Appendix C.1 ▽Offline RL 6:Train the BC flow policyπ ω by minimizingL BC Flow(ω)▷Appendix C.2 ▽Online fine-tuning in offline-to-online RL 7:Train the one-step flow policyπ η by minimizingL One-step Flow(η)▷Appendix C.2 8:Update the target return vector fieldv ¯θ using Polyak averages 9:Returnv θ,π ω, andπ η. Our algorithm, Value Flows, consists of three main components:(1)the vector field estimating the return distribution,(2)the confidence weight prioritizing learning the return distribution at uncertain transition, and(3)the flow policy selecting actions. Numerically, our method achieves a 1-Wasserstein distance 3× lower than the best-performing baseline. 5.2 COMPARING TO PRIOR OFFLINE AND OFFLINE-TO-ONLINE METHODS Offline RL.Our next experiments compare Value Flows to prior offline RL methods, including those estimating the return distribution using alternative mechanisms. We compare our method against baselines on both state-based tasks and image-based tasks. 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Steps (x1000) 0 20 40 60 80 100Average Success Rate Average Performance Across 6 Environments Value Flows FQL IFQL IQL IQN RLPD Figure 3:Offline-to-online evaluation.Using the same distributional flow-matching objective, Value Flows achieves higher average success rates. We hypothesize that Value Flows continues outperforming prior state-of-the-art RL and distributional RL methods using on- line interactions, without any modifications to the distributional flow-matching losses. 4 suggest that adding the BCFM regularization loss into the distributional flow matching objective is important for making progress on the puzzle-3x3 task, while choosing the correct regularization coefficient λ boosts the performance of Value Flows by 2.6×. Limitations.Although we focus on learning the full return distribution using flow-matching and reweighting our flow-matching objective using uncertainty estimation, it remains unclear how to disentangle the epistemic uncertainty from the aleatoric uncertainty with the current method. Neural fitted q iteration–first experiences with a data efficient neural reinforcement learning method. A.3 FLOW MATCHING Algorithm 2Euler method for solving the flow ODE (Eq. The deterministic nature of ODEs equips flow-matching methods with simpler learning objectives and faster infer- ence speed than denoising diffusion models (Lip- man et al., 2023; 2024). Lemma 4.Given a vector field vk, the distributional flow matching loss (Eq. 20 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Lemma 5.Given a vector field vk, the distributional conditional flow matching loss (Eq. C COMPONENTS OF THE PRACTICAL ALGORITHM C.1 PRACTICAL FLOW MATCHING LOSSES Our practical loss for fitting the return distribution involves the DC