REAL METHOD of "Single Index Bandits: Generalized Linear Contextual Bandits with Unknown Reward Functions" (arXiv 2506.12751v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We first consider the case where the unknown reward function is monotonically increasing, and propose two novel and efficient algorithms, STOR and ESTOR, that achieve decent regrets under standard assumptions. We then extend our methods to the high-dimensional sparse setting and show that the same regret rate can be attained with the sparsity index. Next, we introduce GSTOR, an algorithm that is agnostic to general reward functions, and establish regret bounds under a Gaussian design assumption. We propose a family of SIB algorithms that achieve strong theoretical guarantees and demonstrate great empirical performance in this work, all without knowing the form of the reward function. Another class of GLB algorithms improves computational efficiency via second-order online optimization (Jun et al., 2017; Xue et al., 2024), while these methods also presume a known link function for online Newton updates at each round. In conclusion, the single index bandit setting we introduce lies beyond the reach of all existing approaches, and tackling this challenging problem necessitates the development of entirely new algorithmic techniques and theoretical tools. To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we introduce a novel estimator based on Stein’s method, which offers a fundamentally different approach to estimating the unknown parameter. We first leverage this tool to study the case where the unknown reward function is continuously differentiable and monotonically increasing, and propose two efficient algorithms that achieve strong performance under mild conditions. • We propose a novel and efficient estimator based on Stein’s method that requires only the existence of the second moment of the noise and attains the minimax error rate. • As a warm-up, we introduce STOR, an Explore-then-Commit (EtC) style algorithm, and show that it achieves a regret bound of order ˜OT (T 2 3 ). Building on this, we propose a new algorithm named 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 ESTOR that leverages a novel epoch-based schedule, and prove that it achieves a nearly-optimal regret bound of order ˜OT (T 1 2 )under our significantly more challenging problem setting. • Furthermore, we propose GSTOR, a new method that extends STOR to the general case where the reward functions are not necessarily monotonic. We introduce a double-exploration-then-exploit methodology that combines our Stein’s method-based estimator with a kernel regression procedure to approximate the unknown link function. • Finally, we validate our theoretical results through extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets, illustrating the effectiveness of our methods across diverse reward structures. 3 METHODS In this section, we introduce our SIB algorithms, beginning with the case of monotonically increasing reward functions. We then extend our approach to the high-dimensional regime and ultimately generalize to non-monotonic settings. We first utilize a novel Stein’s-method-based estimator for the unknown parameter θ∗ under general continuously differentiable reward functions, and show that it achieves the optimal error rate under mild assumptions. While our method assumes that data is sampled from a fixed distribution D, rather than being adversarially chosen, which may appear strong at first glance, we emphasize that this is a reasonable condition in the study of SIMs and is still milder than the stronger assumptions commonly imposed in prior work (see Appendix A). In contrast, our approach avoids these assumptions and aligns with prior bandit work that also employs Stein’s method (Kang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2025). SIMPLEALGORITHMAGNOSTIC TOINCREASINGREWARDFUNCTIONS We first consider the case where the unknown reward function is continuously differentiable and monotonically increasing. As a warm-up, we present our efficient STein’s ORacle single index bandit (STOR) algorithm, which leverages the Explore-then-Commit (EtC) methodology. Although our Algorithm 1 provides the first solution to SIBs with monotonically increasing functions, its regret bound does not match the optimal rate of order ˜OT ( √ T) for GLBs (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). 3.3 IMPROVEDALGORITHMAGNOSTIC TOINCREASINGREWARDFUNCTIONS Our Epoched STein’s ORacle single index bandit (ESTOR) algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. Then under Assumption 2.2, 2.3, 3.3, our Algorithm 2 can attain following regret bound with probability at least1−δ: Since the estimator is computed via a simple average over each epoch and the algorithm performs greedy action selection at each round, the total time complexity is O(dT) . Beyond its strong theoretical guarantee, ESTOR stands out as one of the most efficient algorithms (Ding et al., 2021) in terms of both computation and space among GLB methods, despite addressing a substantially more difficult setting with unknown reward functions. To extend our methods to this sparse high-dimensional regime, we incorporate l1-regularization into our loss function defined in Eqn. Remarkably, our efficient STOR and ESTOR algorithms can be directly applied to the sparse high-dimensional SIB setting by simply replacing the original estimator with the solution to the l1- regularized loss function in Eqn.(1) at each epoch, i.e. line 4 of Algorithm 1 and line 5 of Algorithm 2. We first compute the estimator ˆθ based on Eqn. To handle this fully agnostic case with arbitrary reward functions, we propose a new algorithm, General STein’s ORacle single index bandit (GSTOR), which adopts a double exploration-then-commit strategy. Due to space limit, the full algorithm is presented in Algorithm 3 in Appendix K. For the generalized linear cases (2)–(4), we compare our methods against the widely used UCB-GLM (Li et al., 2017) and GLM-TSL (Kveton et al., 2020) algorithms. In contrast, STOR exhibits a clear exploration-then-exploitation pattern in its regret curve, which initially grows and then flattens out. Due to space constraints, we defer the simulations on the sparse high-dimensional case introduced in Subsection 3.4, as well as two real-world experiments on the Forest Cover Type dataset (Blackard, 1998) and the Yahoo news dataset (Chu et al., 2009) involving the GSTOR method presented in Sub- section 3.5, to Appendix L. According to Table 3, all our proposed methods consistently outperform state-of-the-art GLB methods. Central to our approach is a novel Stein’s-method-based estimator achieving the optimal error rate under mild