REAL METHOD of "A-TPT: Angular Diversity Calibration Properties for Test-Time Prompt Tuning of Vision-Language Models" (arXiv 2510.26441v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Current TPT approaches primarily focus on improving prompt calibration by either maximizing average textual feature dispersion or enforcing orthogonal- ity constraints to encourage angular separation. However, these methods may not always have optimal angular separation between class-wise textual features, which implies overlooking the critical role of angular diversity. To address this, we proposeA-TPT, a novel TPT framework that introduces angular diversity to encourage uniformity in the distribution of normalized textual features induced by corresponding learnable prompts. We show that our approach consistently surpasses state-of-the-art TPT methods in reducing the aggregate average calibration error while maintaining compara- ble accuracy through extensive experiments with various backbones on different datasets. Notably, our approach exhibits superior zero-shot calibration performance on natural distribution shifts and generalizes well to medical datasets. These models are pre-trained with contrastive learning on massive web-scale data — e.g., 400 million image-text caption pairs — to align visual and textual modalities within a shared multimodal latent space. However, manually designing such prompts often requires domain-specific heuristics and may not be optimal across diverse tasks (Shu et al., 2022) To address these limitations, recent works have explored prompt tuning that learns prompts from training data specific to downstream tasks (Zhou et al., 2022a;b). To address this challenge, test-time prompt tuning (TPT) (Shu et al., 2022) has garnered significant attention focused on prompt tuning. To do better prompt calibration, prior works, such as C-TPT (Yoon et al., 2024) and O-TPT (Sharifdeen et al., 2025) have explored methods to encourage dispersion between pairwise textual features, which can be categorized into the following two types: The first type, known as Average Textual Feature Dispersion (ATFD), spreads textual features away from their centroid. The second type enforces orthogonality constraints to encourage angular separation, which exploits an auxiliary orthogonal regularization term in the loss function to encourage pairwise textual features as orthogonal as possible. Although these methods increase feature dispersion to some extent, they often overlook the importance of angular diversity. Inspired by this insight, we proposeA-TPT, a numerical optimization approach that introduces a simple yet effective angular diversity into the test-time prompt tuning framework. Our method maximizes the minimum pairwise angular distance between normalized textual features on the unit hypersphere to promote uniform and diverse prompt distribution, fully utilizing the hyperspherical space (Fig. 2 Preprint • We introduce a numerical optimization method, called A-TPT, for better calibration of test-time prompt tuning for VLMs. • We introduce novel angular diversity that effectively promotes the diversity among textual features, thereby improving the calibration capabilities of VLMs when N >|D| and N <|D| . • We conduct extensive experiments to validate the generalizability of our approach on different datasets, including medical datasets, across various baselines. Despite these advances, such methods rely on annotated training data, which limits their utility when working with pre-trained models in zero-shot settings. In contrast, train-time calibration methods integrate a hybrid calibration objective into the training of deep neural networks, with an auxiliary calibration loss as a regularizer in conjunction with the primary training loss. These include techniques (Kumar et al., 2018; Munir et al., 2022; 2023; Yoon et al., 2023) (i.e., for object classification and detection) that incorporate differentiable auxiliary regularization loss functions during training to reduce calibration error for reliable predictions. However, these train-time calibration methods are supervised and require labeled training data, limiting their applicability in the test-time prompt tuning of VLMs without supervision. 3 PROPOSEDMETHOD Zero-shot classification with large VLMs (CLIP).CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) consists of two encoders: an image encoder (fi) and a text encoder (ft), which map visual and textual inputs into the corresponding feature space vectors. Unlike existing techniques that disperse prompts via L2 dispersion (Yoon et al., 2024) or orthogonality constraints (Sharifdeen et al., 2025), our approach explicitly focuses on maximizing the minimum pairwise angular distance among normalized textual features. This numerical method constructs each prompt-induced feature point uniformly distributed on a unit 5 Preprint Method Metric Group 1 Group 2 Overall(N >|D|) (N <|D|) Baseline Acc. For each data sample, we extract test-time prompt-tuned text features generated by O-TPT and A-TPT (ours), compute pairwise cosine similarities, and plot their mean, as shown in Fig. In contrast, our method’s angular diversity consistently produces text features with slightly higher but more consistent cosine similarities, indicating stable, uniform angular separation. We then calculate the ECE and accuracy separately for each group, allowing a more fine-grained analysis of each method’s performance. In these challenging cases (Group 1), our method significantly outperforms C-TPT as well as O-TPT in terms of calibration performance, resulting in an overall lower ECE. Inspired by insights from the ArcFace (Deng et al., 2019), we propose an angular variant of the cosine loss as the objective function to maximize the minimum pairwise angular distance between the normalized prompt vectors. 4 presents the performance of FPT (Huang et al., 2024) and FPT combined with O-TPT and A-TPT on ISIC 2018 dataset, where A-TPT leads to a notable reduction in Expected Calibration Error (ECE) while preserving high classification 7 Preprint Method MetricImageNetDTDFlowers102Food101SUN397AircraftsOxfordPetsCaltech101UCF101EuroSATStandfordCars Average Pre-trained Backbone: Comparison of methods across fine-grained datasets for Accuracy (Acc.) and Expected Calibration Error (ECE) with CLIP ViT-B/16 and CLIP RN50 pre-trained backbone for both N >|D| and N <|D| cases. Comparison of methods across natural distri- bution shift datasets for Accuracy (Acc.) and Expected Calibration Error (ECE) with TPT (baseline) with CLIP ViT-B/16 (top) and CLIP RN50 (bottom) pre- trained backbones for both N >|D| and N <|D| cases. Comparison of me