REAL METHOD of "ECHO: Toward Contextual Seq2Seq Paradigms in Large EEG Models" (arXiv 2509.22556v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Large EEG Models (LEMs) address this by pretraining encoder-centric architectures on large-scale unlabeled data to extract universal representations. Following the trend of large-scale models, researchers have proposed a se- ries of Large EEG Models (LEMs) that place a pretrained encoder architecture at the core (Zhou et al., 2025a). These models are typically trained on large collections of unlabeled EEG data with self-supervised objectives such as masked reconstruction (Jiang et al., 2024d) or contrastive pre- diction (Wang et al., 2024a), thereby producing latent representations with strong generalization capacity that have demonstrated remarkable transferability across tasks. To address this, we propose a seq2seq-based in- context training approach (see Section 3.3). 3 METHOD In this section, we present the methodology of decoder-centric LEMs and the technical contributions that address the aforementioned challenges. Section 3.3 de- scribes the training objectives and optimization strategies that endow LEMs with ICL. This emphasizes that ECHO is not bound to specific modules but represents a paradigm that can flexibly integrate stronger architectures to further improve performance. For each standardized channel c, we define a mapping setM c, which contains all possible aliases or adjacent variants of that channel under different electrode systems (the template set is provided in Section 4.1). The inputs and outputs are shown at the top-left, bottom-right, and top-right corners, respectively.b, Four sequential learning steps within the sequence format enable ECHO to capture diverse mapping relations.c, Multi-stage training strategy of ECHO. Encoder Block:The encoder block is designed to transform preprocessed EEG signals X∈ RN×T× C into tokens. These embeddings are then arranged into a sequence and refined by attention layers. Decoder Block:The decoderD(·)adopts a standard transformer decoder architecture, where self- attention models the dependencies within the textual sequence and cross-attention enables interac- tion withE(X): As for the decoder input, given a hybrid EEG sample set{E(X ∪)} consisting of the target sampleE(X)and support samples{E(X s)}S s=1, a distinct learnable sample- level positional encoding is assigned and uniformly added to all tokens within the same sample: first, the encoder is initialized to accelerate convergence and yield usable EEG representations; then, the decoder is trained with progressively larger and more diverse support sets to develop multi-task classification and contextual learning capabilities. Training Strategy:To addressC3, the training of ECHO is organized into two consecutive phases. As illustrated in Figure 2c, the first stage is aWarm-up Phase, where the encoder is coupled with a classifier covering all dataset categories to establish a stable initialization. In the first round, a fixed number of support samples is used to regulate the decoder, ensuring stable training under controlled context lengths. In both rounds, training begins with the encoder frozen and then gradually unfrozen for joint optimization. 6 Under Review Next-token prediction:During training, given a sequence of textual tokens{T n}2S+3 n=1 and EEG sample set{E(X ∪)}, the decoderDgenerates the output sequence step by step. The training objective minimizes the cross-entropy loss between predicted distributions and ground-truth tokens. The encoder comprises 4 convolutional layers and a tokenizer based on multi-head self-attention (8 heads, 4 layers, token dim 256). Training & Environment Setting:All training was performed on a server with 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs (40GB). In thewarm-up phase, the encoder was trained for 90 epochs (batch size 64) with Adam (β= (0.9,0.999),ϵ= 1×10 −8), an initial learning rate of5×10 −5 decayed to1×10 −6 via cosine annealing, and dropout 0.2, primarily to stabilize EEG representation learning. In thecontextual training phase, the full model was trained for 40 epochs (batch size 48, dropout 0.1) with differential learning rates (5×10 −5 for the decoder, 5×10 −6 for the encoder). first, 10 epochs with a fixed set of 8 support samples, then randomizing support sample counts between 0 and 12 per step to expose the model to diverse contexts and enhance ICL. A review of classification algorithms for eeg-based brain–computer interfaces.Journal of neural engineering, 4(2):R1, 2007. 13 Under Review APPENDIX A EXPERIMENTSETUPDETAIL A.1 DATASETSETTING For the pre-training phase, a comprehensive corpus of 12 public datasets was aggregated, spanning six distinct Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) tasks. It should be noted that data corruption neces- sitated the exclusion of subject 7, leaving 15 subjects in the SEED-V dataset, which is then partitioned into a 5:5:5 split for training, validation, and testing. A.1.6 ATTENTIONMONITORING This task aims to distinguish between states of attention and inattention using EEG signals. inattention), the first20 secondsof each attention period were used. The objective is to assign labels such as Wake, REM, and non-REM (N1, N2, N3) to sequential epochs of EEG data, which is essential for analyzing sleep patterns and quality. It is pretrained on a diverse collection of recordings to capture features that are broadly applicable to downstream BCI tasks, utilizing efficient self-attention and task-specific adapters to facilitate fine-tuning. It features a criss-cross Transformer architecture with parallel attention mechanisms that independently model spatial and temporal relationships within the data. Subsequently, its EEGSSM architecture, which integrates structured global convolutions with a sliding window attention mechanism, is trained via masked prediction to efficiently capture the multi-scale dependencies inherent in brain signals. A.4 TRAINING& ENVIRONMENTSETTING Our model is trained in two distinct phases, each with a unique set of hyperparameters as specified in Table 6. Algorithm 1Contextual Training Phase of ECHO Input:query eeg, support pairs, query text (for training only) 1:functionPREPROCESS(raw eeg)▷Unify channels, filter, etc. 2:returnprocessed eeg 3:functionENCODER(processed eeg)▷Convert EEG to a sequence of tokens 4:returneeg tokens Step 1: Encode all EEG samples into a unified context 5:all eegs←[s.eeg for s in support pairs] + [query eeg] 6:eeg tokens←[encoder(preprocess(eeg)) for eeg in all eegs] 7:eeg context←concat(eeg tokens) Step 2: Decoder performs autoregressive prediction 10:logits←decoder(