REAL METHOD of "Uncertainty as Feature Gaps: Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification of LLMs in Contextual Question-Answering" (arXiv 2510.02671v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We then derive an upper bound for epistemic uncertainty and show that it can be interpreted as semantic feature gaps in the given model’s hidden representations relative to the ideal model. Experiments on multiple QA benchmarks in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution settings show that our method substantially outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised (sampling-free and sampling-based) and supervised UQ methods, achieving up to a 13-point PRR improvement while incurring a negligible inference overhead. Recent works (Bakman et al., 2025; Vashurin et al., 2025) have demonstrated that UQ methods exhibit strong empirical performance across a variety of evaluation benchmarks. While these results are encouraging, most existing works (Yaldiz et al., 2025a; Lin et al., 2024; Kuhn et al., 2023; Duan et al., 2024) design and evaluate their methods primarily on closed-book factual question answering (QA) tasks, which test the success of UQ methods on the model’s memory abilities. Although this direction is important, another critical ability of LLMs that deserves more attention from a UQ perspective is theircontextualcapabilities. With the increasing popularity of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) in many LLM applications, detecting errors in model *Corresponding author & Work done during the internship at Capital One 1 arXiv:2510.02671v2 [cs.CL] 23 Oct 2025 Preprint Figure 1: generations conditioned on retrieved context has become more important. Motivated by these observations, we focus on developing a theoretically grounded UQ method for contextual QA. In this setting, the relevant context is either already retrieved or directly provided by the user, and a context-relevant question is posed to the model. To quantify the uncertainty of an LLM, we first propose an uncertainty metric defined as the cross-entropy between the true predictive distribution and the given model’s distribution, inspired by Schweighofer et al. Our approach introduces a key modification to their formulation by reversing the position of the true and given model distributions within the cross-entropy, and adapting it specifically for LLMs. After approximating the true predictive distribution with a perfectly prompted hypothetical ideal model, we show that epistemic uncertainty can be bounded by the distance between the last layer hidden state of the given model and the ideal hypothetical model. (2025), we extract the aforemen- tioned high-level semantic features using a small set of labeled samples to identify the optimal layer for feature extraction. Our method is highly efficient and achieves substantial performance gains: Furthermore, with the same amount of labeled data, it surpasses strong supervised baselines such as SAPLMA (Azaria & Mitchell, 2023) and LookbackLens (Chuang et al., 2024) by up to 13 PRR points, while exhibiting significantly better out-of-distribution generalization compared to SAPLMA, which is an important and desirable property for supervised UQ methods. The overview of our proposed method is visualized in Figure 1. With a few exceptions, most approaches rely on heuristic-based methods that estimate the correctness of a model’s (greedy or sampled) generation. Our objective is to find an uncertainty quantification method U(x,c,y)∈R that is negatively correlatedwith the correctness of the generated sequence y. This distribution represents the behavior of an ideal model that is free from epistemic uncertainty, i.e., uncertainty arising from incomplete knowledge due to limited data, suboptimal architecture choices, imperfect training, or insufficient instruction tuning. Given the true distribution P ∗(· |x)and given model’s conditional distribution P(· |x, θ), we define thetotal uncertaintyof a tokeny t at generation steptas follows: Lemma 1(Epistemic Uncertainty Upper Bound).For any tokeny t, KL(P(y t |y <t,x, θ∗)∥P(y t |y <t,x, θ))≤2∥W∥ ∥h∗ t −h t∥, where h∗ t ∈ Rd and ht ∈ Rd are the last-layer hidden states of the ideal and actual models with dimension ofd, respectively, andW∈ R V×d is the vocabulary projection matrix at the last layer. ht = PL l=1 hl t and h∗ t = PL l=1 hl∗ t , where hl t is the output of layer l at timestep t. For each feature, we then construct contrastive instruction–input pairs designed to isolate that feature. For honesty, we contrast the instructions “be honest” versus “be a liar.” Selecting Optimal Layers and Ensembling.We use the same dataset employed for feature extraction to select the most informative layer for each feature. For each sample and each layer l, we compute the dot product between the hidden state hl (averaged across all tokens in y) and the extracted feature vector vl: The layer with the highest PRR is selected as the feature layer. For simplicity, we define βi =w iαi, i.e., a scaled version of αi, where the scaling factors wi are trained to minimize the cross-entropy error with respect to the correctness of a generation. Baselines.We compare our method against several widely used unsupervised and supervised UQ methods by using TruthTorchLM library (Yaldiz et al., 2025b). The results of our method compared to the base- lines are presented in Table 1. Our approach achieves consistently superior performance (first or second rank) in both PRR and AUROC across all datasets and models, with the sole exception of Mistral-7B on NarrativeQA. Moreover, our method requires neither sampling nor additional forward passes, which makes it substantially faster than sampling-based approaches such as Semantic Entropy, KLE, and Eccentricity. 5.3 OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTIONEVALUATION A key challenge for supervised UQ methods is their performance under distribution shift, i.e., when the test distribution differs from the training data. To evaluate robustness, we evaluate two supervised 8 Preprint methods, our method and SAPLMA, under out-of-distribution (OOD) settings. For each of the three datasets, we construct a 3×3 train-test matrix, where we train on one dataset in a pair and test on the other. The results, shown in Figure 3, demonstrate that our method is more robust to distribution shifts compared to SAPLMA. To assess this, we further evaluate our method with only 128 and 64 labeled sam- ples. Even with as few as 64 samples, although some performance drop is observed, our method remains substantially stronger than alternative baselines reported in Table 1. 5.6 COMPARISON WITHBASELINEDIRECTIONS Demonstrating the effectiveness of each component of our method is 