REAL METHOD of "Toward Efficient Exploration by Large Language Model Agents" (arXiv 2504.20997v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 TOWARDEFFICIENTEXPLORATION BYLARGELANGUAGEMODELAGENTS Dilip Arumugam Department of Computer Science Princeton University dilip.a@cs.princeton.edu Thomas L. Griffiths Department of Computer Science Department of Psychology Princeton University tomg@princeton.edu ABSTRACT A burgeoning area within reinforcement learning (RL) is the design of sequential decision-making agents centered around large language models (LLMs). Meanwhile, classic algorithms from the RL literature known to gracefully address exploration require technical machinery that can be challenging to operationalize in purely natural language settings. In this work, rather than relying on finetuning or in-context learning to coax LLMs into im- plicitly imitating a RL algorithm, we illustrate how LLMs can be used to explicitly implement an existing RL algorithm (Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement Learn- ing) whose capacity for statistically-efficient exploration is already well-studied. We offer empirical results demonstrating how our LLM-based implementation of a known, data-efficient RL algorithm can be considerably more effective in natural language tasks that demand prudent exploration. However, such agents still reside in the classic RL setting (Sutton & Barto, 1998) and, consequently, must still grapple with the fundamental obstacles to data efficiency (generalization, exploration, and credit assignment) that the RL literature has studied for decades. While composing LLMs to arrive at new agent designs is the current norm, we propose that an alternative strategy is to re-examine existing RL algorithms and consider how LLMs might implement them in otherwise inaccessible environments. An RL algorithm consists of specifying inputs and detailing a sequence of steps for determining behavior at each time period. Why should the emergence and proliferation of LLMs change the fundamental principles of agent design? Instead, as visualized in Figure 1, perhaps LLMs can be used to create new, potentially-inexact incarnations of existing RL algorithms via the subroutines needed to implement them. We demonstrate how modern LLMs afford a contemporary implementation of an existing RL algorithm, Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement Learning (PSRL) (Strens, 2000; Osband et al., 2013), that is both well-studied and whose capacity for good exploration is already known to yield provably-efficient RL in a number of problem classes. Abstractly, an RL algorithm is an ordered sequence of steps. Existing approaches for LLM agent design (left) orchestrate some number of LLMs to implicitly induce a RL algorithm. In contrast, this paper advocates for a novel agent design principle (right) whereby an existing RL algorithm is explicitly implemented by outsourcing individual steps to distinct LLMs. Altogether, our work underscores the importance of addressing exploration in the design of LLM agents, illustrates the considerable value that decades of RL research have to offer data-efficient decision-making with LLMs, and establishes a key distinction between LLMs that implement a RL algorithm versus a RL algorithm that is implemented with LLMs. Within each of K∈N total episodes, the agent acts for H steps beginning with an initial state s1 ∼β(·) and, at each timestep h∈[H] , observes the current state sh ∈ S, selects an action ah ∈ A, enjoys a rewardrh =R(s h, ah), and transitions to a next states h+1 ∼ T(· |sh, ah). An agent is characterized by its non-stationary, stochastic policy π:S ×[H]→∆(A) , which encodes a pattern of behavior by mapping individual states and the current timestep to a probability distribution over actions. We assess the performance of a policy π in MDP M at timestep h∈[H] when starting at state s∈ S and taking action a∈ A by its associated action-value function Qπ M,h(s, a) =E  HP h′=h R(sh′, ah′) sh =s, ah =a  . Taking the value function as V π M,h(s) = Ea∼πh(·|s) h Qπ M,h(s, a) i , we define the optimal policy π⋆ as achieving supremal value V ⋆ M,h(s) = sup π∈Π V π M,h(s) for all s∈ S, h∈[H] where Π denotes the class of all non-stationary, stochastic policies. Abstractly, a RL algorithm is a sequence {π(k)}k∈[K] where the policy deployed at each episode π(k) is a function of the current history Hk. We may evaluate the performance of a RL algorithm on MDP M via its cumulative regret: Naturally, an agent designer seeks out a RL algorithm with minimal cumulative regret. While the standard RL objective (Sutton & Barto, 1998) calls for an agent to minimize regret, another performance criterion is the Bayesian regret, which simply integrates out the randomness in M with respect to an agent’s prior: The MDP transition and reward functions are unknown to a RL agent and, with each step taken in the true environment, the resulting reward and next-state transition provide ground-truth observations by which the agent may refine posterior beliefs about the underlying MDP M. One might hope that the epistemic state could be lazily updated while still enabling strategic exploration by reducing epistemic uncertainty; this insight is the basis of posterior-sampling methods in RL. 3.1 THECLASSICAPPROACH The promise of Bayesian RL methods is to facilitate statistically-efficient exploration by reducing an agent’s epistemic uncertainty about the world. One strategy for reaping the benefits of uncertainty- based exploration in a computationally-tractable manner is through Posterior Sampling for RL (PSRL) (Strens, 2000), presented as Algorithm 1. Rather than updating the epistemic state at each timestep, PSRL holds it fixed during each episode and only updates the posterior at the end using the full trajectory τk. A key contribution of this work is expanding empirical support for PSRL, an algorithm that has largely been a method of theoretical study up to this point. Meanwhile, the minority of such methods that actually strive to implement PSRL have either been met with mixed results across hard-exploration problems or have been limited to evaluations in smaller-scale domains. The PSRL algorithm with LLM sub- routines of posterior sampling, optimal behavior with respect to a sample, and posterior updating shown. While there has been progress and even notable successes in this space for deep model-based RL agents (Kaiser et al., 2020), it is unclear if those methods are readily applicable to the natural language tasks faced by LLM agents. Indeed, we find this to be the case empirically when app