REAL METHOD of "When and Where to Reset Matters for Long-Term Test-Time Adaptation" (arXiv 2603.03796v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We define prediction inconsistency to quantify this discrepancy, and then use it to update model hyperparameters via reparameterization, improving our adaptability under challenging domain shifts. • Extensive experimental results across various long-term TTA benchmarks demonstrate the effec- tiveness of our method. Continual test-time adaptation.Self-training methods face a critical challenge in a non-stationary domain stream, where their performance gradually deteriorates over time with noisy pseudo-labeling repeated (Wang et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2023). To better handle error accumulation, recent research has explored reliable adaptation methods, such as adaptive learning rates (Park et al., 2024; Maharana et al., 2025) and adaptive loss functions (Liu et al., 2024a). To address this, ROID (Marsden et al., 2024) proposes a weight ensembling method that updates the current model by combining with a weighted pre-trained model. More aggressive methods have also been proposed, including resetting all parameters to their pre-trained state at every fixed step (Press et al., 2023). Another line of research has developed regularization to restrict the deviation between the pre-trained and current parameters, such as weighting regularization via Fisher information (Niu et al., 2022) or adjusting the regularization coefficient based on parameter divergence from the pre- trained state (Hoang et al., 2024). This coefficient can also be dynamically assigned for every single layer based on its depth (Yang et al., 2024) or its sensitivity to distribution shifts (Choi et al., 2022). 3 METHOD 3.1 PROBLEMDEFINITION Given a pre-trained source modelf θ0, our goal is to improve its performance at test time over a long sequence of test domains without access to source data. At stept, the current modelf θt−1 is given a test samplex i t and generates a predictionˆyi t =σ(f θt−1 (xi t)), wheref ∗ yields logit outputs and σis the softmax function. The model is evaluated using its predictionsˆy t, and is then adapted as θt−1 →θ t using unsupervised objective functions. Inspired by this, we introduce a selective reset scheme that determines which layers to reset, prioritizing those closer to the output. We define a reset proportionr t that controls how many layers are reset, as follows: The layers to be reset are determined starting from the output, such that the lastr t proportion of layers are reset, while the remaining1−r t are preserved1. EMA then aggregates the CMA-accumulated values at every reset-triggered point, after which CMA values are re-initialized to zero (see Algorithm 1). More details on this scheme are provided in 1For example, with 15 layers andr t = 0.5, the 8 deepest layers are reset (rounded to the nearest integer). 3.5 ON-THE-FLYADAPTATIONADJUSTMENT While we assume domain-evolving settings, we do not explicitly model how domain evolution un- folds when designing our method. Specifically, we apply these add-on methods to the commonly applicable baselines (i.e., ETA, EATA and ROID) and compare them with our approach in Table 1. While the TTA baselines in Ta- ble 1 are built with entropy minimiza- tion (EM), we further report the results using objectives other than EM to vali- date the general utility of our method in Table 2. As any TTA model trains it- self using pseudo-labels derived from its own noisy predictions, it eventually col- lapses (Niu et al., 2023), thus making our reset effective regardless of the underly- ing objective. Fur- thermore, CCC reveals the limitations of continual TTA methods and the effectiveness of our method under long-term collapse-prone settings in Table 4. We further evaluate the generalization of our method using ViT-B-16 in Table 3. However, our method still yields the best performance on CIN-C, even though it is less prone to collapse. Using IN-C, our approach proves that it is effective not only in preventing collapse but also in enhancing model adaptability by getting the best performance consistently across the first, last and overall visits. However, our method still yields stable and superior performance. For each reset,C t is computed for the batch as in Eq. In contrast, our method demonstrates superior resilience against collapse, consistently maintaining a uniform class distribution. We compute the average accuracy at each step over 103 batches across all CCC levels. Although performance decreases with smaller batch sizes as expected, our method degrades more gracefully than ROID and RDumb. While RDumb excels primarily at its default size (64), our method maintains stable, improved performance regardless of the size. Specifically, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art by 44.12% on CCC-Hard. For each reset, we compute the average accuracy over 10 batches immediately before and after the reset. When performance drops, our method needs an average of 32 batches, which is 6.68×fewer than RDumb. 3 doesn’t encode temporal information; thus, points on the right do not necessarily represent later time steps. At every step, we use CMA to accumulate parametersθ i t−1 and squared loss gradients with respect to each parameter,  ∇θi t−1 L(Bt;θ t−1) 2 , which correspond to the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix, as follows: Overall, the computation and memory overhead of our additional parameters is minimal, making our method highly efficient in practice. We compare our method with our variant that eliminates the knowledge recovery module (Sec. As reported in Table 12, our variant without the recovery module exhibits a gradual accuracy decline across revisits, while our method maintains the superior performance. A.9 ALGORITHM The complete workflow of ASR is summarized in Algorithm 1. , T}do // 1) Model Adaptation Generate logitsz t =f θt−1 (Bt); Compute lossL(B t;θ t−1)in Eq. For a fair comparison, our method ignores other components that are directly unrelated to reset; otherwise, it achieves 51.19 / 42.42 / 21.36% on CCC-Easy / -Medium / -Hard, respectively. D.2 ROBUSTNESS TOTRULYSMALLBATCHSIZES We evaluate our method on truly small batch sizes, specifically 2 and 4, using a single split (transition speed 1000; random seed 43) of CCC-Easy under the same setup as Fig. As shown in Table 24, at batch size 4, our method achieves 25.58 compared to 17.85 for RDumb, indicating that its robustness extends to smaller batch sizes below 16. D.6 RESULTS ONVIT-TINY We evaluate our method on a lightweight backbone (ViT-Tiny). Even under such severe ca-