REAL METHOD of "Decoupled DMD: CFG Augmentation as the Spear, Distribution Matching as the Shield" (arXiv 2511.22677v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

CFG AUGMENTATION AS THE SPEAR, DISTRIBUTIONMATCHING AS THESHIELD Dongyang Liu1,2 Peng Gao1,/enve♀eDavid Liu1,2 Ruoyi Du1 Zhen Li1 Qilong Wu1 Xin Jin1 Sihan Cao1 Shifeng Zhang1 Hongsheng Li2,/enve♀eSteven HOI1 1Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group 2The Chinese University of Hong Kong /enve♀ejingpeng.gp@alibaba-inc.com /enve♀ehsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk /gtbhttps://github.com/Tongyi-MAI/Z-Image ABSTRACT Diffusion model distillation has emerged as a powerful technique for creating efficient few-step and single-step generators. Through a rigorous decomposition of the DMD train- ing objective, we reveal that in complex tasks like text-to-image generation, where CFG is typically required for desirable few-step performance, the primary driver of few-step distillation is not distribution matching, but a previously overlooked component we identify asCFGAugmentation(CA). We further validate this decoupling by demonstrating that while the DM term is a highly effective regularizer, it is not unique; simpler non-parametric constraints or GAN-based objectives can serve the same stabilizing function, albeit with different trade-offs. Notably, our method has been adopted by theZ-Imageproject to develop a top-tier 8-step image generation model, empirically validating the generalization and robustness of our findings. LIKL(preal, pfake) = Z 1 0 KL(preal,τ ||p fake,τ )dτ.(1) In practice, the gradient of this objective is estimated using a pair of “real” (teacher) and “fake” (student-tracking) models, making the training process feasible. Through a rigorous decomposition of the practical DMD training objective that utilizes real score CFG, we reveal that its effectiveness is not driven by a single mechanism, but by a clear division of labor between two distinct components: We demonstrate that this component acts as the coreengineof distillation, responsible for converting a multi-step model into a high-quality few-step generator. Diff-Instruct (Luo et al., 2023b) pioneered its application in few-step diffusion distillation, and DMD (Yin et al., 2024b) was among the first to successfully apply this principle to large-scale text-to-image models. We are the first to decouple the role of this CFG term during distillation and to reveal its dominance in multi-to-few-step conversion. 3 REVISITING ANDDECOMPOSINGDMD The goal of Distribution Matching Distillation (DMD) is to train a student generator, denoted as Gθ, to emulate the output distribution of a pre-trained, frozen teacher diffusion model in a few-step or even single-step inference process. The training is guided by minimizing a loss function, Eq. For single-step generation, t is 0 and zt is random noise; for few-step generation, zt can be obtained by going through the previous steps, a technique called “backward simulation” (Yin et al., 2024a). sreal cond, the “real score” estimated by the original multi-step teacher model; and sfake cond, the “fake” score estimate from an auxiliary “fake” model that is trained concurrently on the generator’s outputs. Training with CA alone is remarkably effective at converting the multi-step model into a few-step generator. Besides, the generated results also demonstrate high similarity in content to the full DMD objective, indicating the dominant role of the CA term in DMD loss. CFG Augmentation is the engine for few-step conversion.The ability of the distilled generator to produce high-quality samples in a few steps is almost entirely attributable to the∆ cfg term. Distribution Matching is a regularizer for training stability.The ∆real-fake term, while not the primary driver of distillation, plays a crucial role as a regularizer that prevents the training process from diverging and ensures the quality of the final output. 4 (b) 4 Step SDXL 200Steps 600Steps 1000Steps 1400Steps 1800Steps DMCACA+DM 200Steps 1000Steps 2000Steps 4000Steps 6000Steps DMCACA+DM ImageRewardHPSv2.1 ImageRewardHPSv2.1 CA+DMDMCA CA+DMDMCA(a) 1 Step SDXL Figure 2: This section demonstrates that even a simple non-parametric statistical constraint can prevent training collapse, thereby substantiating the role of Distribution Matching (DM) as a regularizer. Following existing methods (Sauer et al., 2024b), we use a discriminator initialized from the weights of the pre-trained teacher model. Besides, the approach introduces significant challenges in training stability, as the training still collapsed after 4k iterations. The increasing complexity from statistical constraints to GANs correlates with decreasing training robustness, which echoes the claim in Diff- Instruct (Luo et al., 2023b) that score-matching can be viewed as a more stable alternative to GANs, especially when the distributions have disjoint supports. This aligns with practices in V AE training (Rombach et al., 2021; 2022) or advanced few-step distillation (Lin et al., 2025), where models are often first trained with a stable objective before being fine-tuned with a GAN loss to achieve peak performance. first, how exactly does the CA engine drive the multi-step to few-step conversion? And second, by what mechanism does the DM regularizer ensure the stability of this process? 4.1 DISSECTING THECA ENGINE: THEROLE OF THERE-NOISINGSCHEDULE To understand the working mechanism of the CA engine, we investigate a central question:How does the choice of re-noising timestep τ influence the effect of CA? Since τ determines the noise level at which the CFG signal is computed, it serves as a powerful probe into the engine’s behavior. The generator is trained with CA alone, while the fake model keeps training on the generator’s output as in DMD. To isolate this effect, we design an experiment where a single-step generator is trained using only the CA term (∆real cfg ). We then systematically vary the sampling range of the re-noising timestep τ, starting from the noisiest end of the spectrum and gradually expanding towards cleaner timesteps. This conclusion is further supported by the fact that the training collapses when τ is restricted to clean timesteps only ([0.7,1.0] ): A CORRECTIVEMECHANISM Having established CA as the engine, we now turn to the DM regularizer and ask:How does it counteract the artifacts introduced by CA and ensure training stability? To gain insight into this corrective mechanism, we design a specific diagnostic experiment. Even late-stage generation steps, which primarily add high-frequency details, can still suffer from low-frequency artifacts like color oversaturation, either inherit