REAL METHOD of "Reassessing Layer Pruning in LLMs: New Insights and Methods" (arXiv 2411.15558v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

NEW INSIGHTS AND METHODS Yao Lu1∗ Hao Cheng Yujie Fang 1 Zeyu Wang1 Jiaheng Wei2 Dongwei Xu1 Qi Xuan1† Xiaoniu Yang1 Zhaowei Zhu 1Zhejiang University of Technology 2HKUST-GZ ABSTRACT Although large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success across various domains, their considerable scale necessitates substantial computational resources, posing significant challenges for deployment in resource-constrained environments. Layer pruning, as a simple yet effective compression method, re- moves layers of a model directly, reducing computational overhead. Our results demonstrate that a simple approach, i.e., pruning the final 25% of layers followed by fine- tuning the lm head and the remaining last three layer, yields remarkably strong performance. By selectively removing redundant patterns—such as parameters (Sun et al., 2023), attention heads (Ma et al., 2023a) and layers (Men et al., 2024)—pruning aims to slim down the model while maintaining its original performance as much as possible. et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b) that aim to propose various sophisticated pruning methods, we take a step back and focus on the following questions: Will iterative pruning outperform one-shot pruning? To answer the aforementioned questions, we spent thousands of GPU hours to benchmark layer pruning, conducting extensive experiments across 7 layer selection metrics, 4 state-of-the-art open- source LLMs, 6 fine-tuning methods, 5 pruning strategies on 10 common datasets. In contrast, freezing the other layers and fine-tuning only the last few remaining layers and lm head, also known as partial-layer fine-tuning, can achieve higher accuracy while reducing the training time. The result is unique to layer pruning since LoRA and partial- layer fine-tuning perform similarly as Table 3 in full-model fine-tuning. Iterative pruning offers no benefit , i.e., considering both training costs and performance gains, iterative pruning, where layers are removed step-by-step, fails to beat the one-shot pruning, where a single cut is made. We conduct an extensive evaluation of layer selection met- rics, fine-tuning methods, and pruning strategies, providing practical insights into effective pruning techniques based on thousands of GPU hours across multiple datasets. We identify reverse-order as a simple and effective layer selection metric, find that partial-layer fine-tuning outperforms LoRA-based techniques, and demon- strate that one-shot pruning is as effective as iterative pruning while reducing training costs. Our pruned models require up to106× fewer training tokens compared to training from scratch, while still comparing favorably to various popular community LLMs of similar size, such as ChatGLM2-6B (GLM et al., 2024), Vicuna-7B-v1.5 (Zheng et al., 2024), Qwen1.5- 7B (Yang et al., 2024a) and Baichuan2-7B (Baichuan, 2023). LLM layer pruning is a technique used to reduce the number of layers in LLMs, aiming to lower computational costs without significantly degrading performance. Specif- ically, it evaluates the contribution of each layer to the model’s overall performance, using criteria such as gradients, activation values, parameter weights, or the layer’s influence on the loss function. Layers that contribute the least are then pruned to reduce complexity. For example, LaCo (Yang et al., 2024b) achieves rapid model size reduction by folding subsequent layers into the previous layer, effectively preserving the model structure. ShortGPT (Men et al., 2024) uses Block Influence (BI) to measure the importance of each layer in LLMs and remove layers with low BI scores. For example, in traditional DNN layer pruning (Chen & Zhao, 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023; Guenter & Sideris, 2024), assessing the importance of each layer is relatively straightforward, as it is tied to a single task. Although recent research focuses on developing sophisticated prun- ing methods (Kim et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2023a; Men et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024c;b; Yang et al., 2024b; Zhong et al., 2024), few studies (Jaiswal et al., 2023; Williams & Aletras, 2024; Muralid- haran et al., 2024) take a step back and revisit existing LLM pruning techniques. (2024) develop a set of prac- tical practices for LLMs that combine layer, width, attention and MLP pruning with knowledge distillation-based retraining. However, these methods either do not consider layer pruning or lack a comprehensive comparison. 3 Work in Progress 3 B ACKGROUND AND NOTATION 3.1 P ROBLEM FORMULATION FOR LAYER PRUNING An LLM M consists of multiple Transformer layers L = {l1, l2, · · ·, ln}, each containing a pair of multi-head attention and feed-forward network modules: M = l1 ◦ l2 · · · ◦ln, (1) Layer pruning aims to find a subset of layers L′ ⊆ L such that the pruned model M′ maintains acceptable performance while reducing the model’s complexity, which can be formalized as: Numerous methods have proposed various metrics to identify and prune unimportant layers. It assigns lower importance scores to the deeper layers and prune them. (2024), we compute I n Magnitude = P k ||W n k ||p, where W n k denotes the weight matrix of operation k within the n-th transformer layer. For a given calibration dataset D, the significance of removing weight parameters is indi- cated by the change in training loss L := |L(W n k , D) − L(W n k = 0, D)| ≈ |∂L(D) ∂W n k W n k |. Then we define the Taylor score of the n-th transformer layer as I n Taylor = P k | ∂L(D) ∂W n k W n k |. We then prune those layers that lead to a smaller degradation of the PPL. First, we explore which metric is most effective for identifying unimportant layers, helping researchers make informed choices. Then, we investigate which fine-tuning method most effectively restores model performance after pruning. 4.1 A RE FANCY METRICS ESSENTIAL FOR IDENTIFYING REDUNDANT LAYERS TO PRUNE ? The first question is to find the most “redundant” layers to prune. We uniformly prune 8 layers (25% pruning ratio) for Vicuna-7B-v1.5, Qwen1.5-7B and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, and 6 layers for Gemma2-2B-Instruct. Compared to LoRA and QLoRA, which inject trainable low-rank factor- ization matrices into each layer, partial-layer fine-tuning simply freezes the weights of some layers while updating only the specified layers to save computing resources and time (Shen et al., 2021; Ngesthi et al., 2021; Peng & Wang, 2020). one is to finetune only the model head ( lm head only), and th