REAL METHOD of "FERD: Fairness-Enhanced Data-Free Adversarial Robustness Distillation" (arXiv 2509.20793v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Kliment Ohridski 4Nanyang Technological University 5STCA, Microsoft Abstract Data-Free Robustness Distillation (DFRD) aims to transfer the robustness from the teacher to the student without ac- cessing the training data. While existing methods focus on overall robustness, they overlook the robust fairness issues, leading to severe disparity of robustness across different cat- egories. To bridge these gaps, we present the first Fairness- Enhanced data-free Robustness Distillation (FERD) frame- work to adjust the proportion and distribution of adversar- ial examples. It generates Fairness-Aware Examples (FAEs) by enforcing a uniformity constraint on feature-level predictions, which suppress the dominance of class-specific non-robust features, providing a more balanced representation across all cate- gories. Then, FERD constructs Uniform-Target Adversarial Examples (UTAEs) from FAEs by applying a uniform tar- get class constraint to avoid biased attack directions, which distribute the attack targets across all categories and prevents overfitting to specific vulnerable categories. However, in practice, raw training data for teacher model are often unavailable, making it difficult to apply traditional distillation methods directly. To break through this limita- tion, researchers propose the Data-Free Knowledge Distil- lation (DFKD) method (Micaelli and Storkey 2019; Fang et al. 2022), which syn- thesizes alternative samples through a training generator to simulate the original data distribution and realize knowledge transfer. Based on this, the Data-Free Robustness Distilla- tion (DFRD) method (Yuan et al. 2024) is further developed to combine the gen- eration and distillation mechanisms to effectively deliver ro- bustness without the need for real data, providing a novel solution for resource-constrained and data-unavailable envi- ronments for model defense. Despite their effectiveness, existing DFRD methods mainly aim to enhance the overall robustness of the student, while overlooking a critical issue: In this paper, we make the first attempt at investigating the robust fairness problem in the context of DFRD. Based on these findings, we propose a Fairness- Enhanced data-free Robustness Distillation (FERD) frame- work by adjusting the proportion and distribution of the syn- thetic samples to mitigate these problems. Specifically, for the proportion, we introduce a robustness-guided class reweighting strategy that en- courages the generator to synthesize more samples from weakly robust categories, thereby compensating for their vulnerability and promoting fairness in robustness. For the distribution, we propose to generate complementary data samples for advanced robustness and fairness distillation. Firstly, we generate Fairness-Aware Examples (FAEs) by enforcing a uniformity constraint on feature-level predictions that are closely associated with non-robust representations. To avoid biased attack directions, we further construct Uniform-Target Adversarial Examples (UTAEs) from FAEs by applying a uniform target class constraint during adversarial generation. Experiments on the three datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR- 100, and Tiny-ImageNet) show that compared with base- line method, FERD improves +15.1%, +2.7%, +3.4% and +6.4% on the worst-class robustness against FGSM (Good- fellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), PGD-20 (Madry et al. (I) We make the first attempt at investigating the problem of robust fairness in DFRD, revealing that uniform distribution among original data categories and attack target bias are the two key factors affecting fairness. (II) We propose the FERD frame- work, which enhances robust fairness at both the propor- tional and distributional levels through robustness-guided category reweighting and distribution-aware sample genera- tion mechanisms. (III) Experiments have demonstrated that FERD can significantly enhance the robustness and fairness of the student model, and the robust accuracy in the weak- est class has been improved by+15.1%compared with the existing optimal methods, effectively alleviating the robust bias phenomenon in DFRD. Related Work Data-Free Robustness Distillation DFRD aims to transfer the robustness from teacher to stu- dent model using synthetic samples instead of teacher’s orig- inal training data. 2024a) first defines the concept of DFRD and proves that the difficulty lies in the lower upper bound of knowledge transfer information. To coordinate the gradients of the clean and robust distillation tasks, DERD also introduces a stochastic gra- dient aggregation module, thereby optimizing the trade-off between robustness and accuracy. 2022) proposes a fast DFKD, which reuses the common features in the training data to synthesize different data instances. In this paper, we make the first attempt at solving the problem of robust fairness transfer in DFRD. To ad- dress this issue, FRL proposes fairness constraints, adjust- ing decision margins and sample weights when these con- straints are violated. 2023) identify distinct “source-class” and “target-class” unfairness within adversar- ial training, tackling these by adjusting per-class attack in- tensities and applying a uniform distribution constraint. For the the first proportion problem, we introduce a robustness-guided class reweighting strat- egy that encourages the generator to synthesize more sam- ples from weakly robust classes. Specifically, we firstly generate Fairness-Aware Examples(FAEs) by enforc- ing constraint on predictions from non-robust feature, which are highly related to adversarial targets. Then, to avoid bi- ased attack directions, we further construct Uniform-Target Adversarial Examples (UTAEs) from FAEs by applying constraint during adversarial generation, preventing attacks focus on “vulnerable category”. Non-Robust Feature Suppression for Balanced Representations To achieve the fair tendency to each target when gener- ating adversarial examples, we design a FAEs generation method and use them as benign samples, which ensures that FAEs’ non-robust feature predictions are not concentrated in a few categories; otherwise, adversarial perturbations would be more likely to attack such categories. Luni =KL(U, f T l+(Znr)).(7) To further enhance the quality and diversity of the FAEs, we introduce additional loss functions during the training process of the generator: By training with the above loss function, the generator synthesize FAEs xF , which not only convey effective knowled