REAL METHOD of "Hybrid Training for Vision-Language-Action Models" (arXiv 2510.00600v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 HYBRIDTRAINING FOR VISION-LANGUAGE-ACTIONMODELS Pietro Mazzaglia Qualcomm AI Research∗ pmazzagl@qti.qualcomm.com Cansu Sancaktar† University of T¨ubingen, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems cansu.sancaktar@tue.mpg.de Markus Peschl Qualcomm AI Research mpeschl@qti.qualcomm.com Daniel Dijkman Qualcomm AI Research ddijkman@qti.qualcomm.com ABSTRACT Using Large Language Models to produce intermediate thoughts, a.k.a. Delaying an agent’s actions in real-world executions, as in robotic manipulation settings, strongly affects the usability of a method, as tasks require long sequences of actions. However, is the generation of long chains-of-thought a strong prerequisite for achieving performance improve- ments? In this work, we explore the idea of Hybrid Training (HyT), a framework that enables VLAs to learn from thoughts and benefit from the associated perfor- mance gains, while enabling the possibility to leave out CoT generation during in- ference. We evaluate the proposed method in a series of simulated benchmarks and real-world experiments. 1 INTRODUCTION 1 Hz 2 Hz 3 Hz Inference frequency 45% 50% 55%Success rate Figure 1:Hybrid Training (HyT) of VLAs increases the agent’s per- formance similarly toECoT, but also maintains the same fast infer- ence as standardVLAs. large policy models that are trained end-to-end to take language instructions and raw camera im- ages as inputs, and output low-level robotic actions. VLAs possess several advantages over previous work, such as multimodal prompting of the agent and the availability of knowledge from the base pre-trained VLM. In order to further unleash the capabilities of VLAs with little data, recent works have trained mod- els to predict intermediate outputs, representing the agent’s intentions, before predicting actions (Zawalski et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025). In this work, we explore the hypothesis that VLA models can similarly develop skilled intuition, when trained with the right objective. Then, at test-time, the model more eagerly recognizes patterns and can leverage such knowledge to generate actions, even in the absence of intermediate thoughts generation. With this hypothesis in mind, we develop aHybrid Training (HyT)framework, which allows the agent to learn from a combination of CoT and actions data. Hybrid training presents a more flexible learning objective, which encompasses both ECoT and standard VLAs. During training, we implement the HyT objective using a Monte Carlo estimate, consisting of sampling a variety of conditional inputs and outputs with different probabilities. This allows VLAs trained with HyT to maintain the same inference time as standard VLAs, while benefitting from training on reasoning traces. Closely related to our method is DualFormer (Su et al., 2025), which proposes to train a language model by systematically dropping out reasoning traces. Concurrent work (Chen et al., 2025) also shows that reason- ing pre-training, co-training and/or dropout can improve performance of VLAs, by improving the representation learned by the model. Our work, instead, provides a method to train a single hybrid system that learns to conditionally generate a variety of outputs. Language is first ”tokenized” into language tokens that are then processed by the LLM. Similarly, VLAs can process visual inputs through a vision encoder, e.g., a vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), that transforms image patches into visual tokens, which are then processed by the LLM. Through imitation learning, the policy’s objective is to learn, at each discrete timestep, the distributionp(a t|xt, l)that solves the given task, which is empirically observed from a dataset of demonstrations. Hybrid Training Figure 2:Hybrid Training (HyT) framework.Given a set of inputs, on the left, including a modality variable, the VLA model learns to conditionally generate a variety of outputs. To address the need for agents capable of producing multiple probability distributions within a single model, we introduce a new training strategy,Hybrid Training(HyT), designed to integrate structured reasoning with flexible policy learning. Definition 4.1 (Hybrid Training)Given a task descriptionland the current environment observa- tionx t, the conditional distribution over actionsa t can be expressed as: similarly to ECoT, it instructs the model to first predict intermediate thoughts and then generate actions. While one could compute the loss directly as the weighted sum of the three terms, for each datapoint, this would reduce variability in the batches, as the model would contain the same thoughts and actions multiple times in the same batch. In order to avoid this, we propose to use a Monte Carlo estimate of the objective in Equation 3. Rather than being used as loss coefficients, the weights wa, wτ , wf define the probabilities of sampling the corresponding inputs and outputs for the model during training. Alternatively, the loss can be an L1 or L2 loss, for continuous action prediction. Baselines.In this Section, we focus on comparing the HyT training methodology with other training paradigms, namely the standard VLA training (Kim et al., 2024), ECoT-like thinking VLA training (Zawalski et al., 2024), and HiRobot-like hierarchical VLA training (Shi et al., 2025). Training.For all approaches, we start training the VLA from the PaliGemma-2 VLM model with 3B parameters (Steiner et al., 2024), which is based on the Gemma-2 LLM (Team et al., 2024) and on the SigLIP vision encoder (Zhai et al., 2023). For each model, we evaluate 3 checkpoints taken at epochs 5, 7 and 10 during training. the models trained with HyT not only outperform standard VLAs, but they also gen- erally perform better than models trained with the ECoT and HiRobot recipes, at all data scales. First, we can observe that for all the methods tested, following instructions from an oracle, rather than self-predicted thoughts, can improve the performance of the agent. Then, we feed this information step-wise, along with the task description, to an LLM that generates a plan made of subtasks and associate subtasks with temporal steps. One plausible conclusion is that HyT and other Chain-of-Thought (CoT) strategies, by leveraging additional thought data during training, can compensate for the lack of robotics pre-training or the scarcity of fine-tuning data, as similarly shown in the other experimental results in this work. We proposed the