REAL METHOD of "Vision-Zero: Scalable VLM Self-Improvement via Strategic Gamified Self-Play" (arXiv 2509.25541v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

(3)Sus- tainable Performance Gain:We introduce Iterative Self-Play Policy Optimization (Iterative-SPO), a novel training algorithm that alternates between Self-Play and reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR), mitigating the performance plateau often seen in self-play-only training and achieving sustained long-term improvements. First, adata scarcity problem—the extraordinary cost of multimodal annotation limits both scale and diversity of training data, with datasets like COCO Attributes requiring $60,480 for 200,000 objects (Patterson & Hays, 2016), Ego4D consuming over 250,000 annotation hours (Grauman et al., 2022), and Visual Genome mobilizing 33,000 annotators (Krishna et al., 2017). • We proposeVision-Zero,the first gamified self-play framework for VLMs that achieves zero-human-in-the-loop post-training, which supports label-free, domain-agnostic inputs and enables highly cost-efficient dataset construction for scalable optimization. • We introduceIterative-SPO,a novel algorithm alternating between Self-Play and RLVR to stabilize training and to avoid premature convergence. A GENERALIZABLEGAMIFICATIONTRAININGFRAMEWORK This section introduces Vision-Zero, a general, scalable, and high-performing gamified VLM post- training framework as illustrated in Fig. Finally, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the advantages of Vision-Zero compared to human-involved training methods (Sect. Each player is assigned an image, where the spy’s image is blank. Each player is then prompted to observe their image and provide a verbal clue that reflects its content such as object descriptions or inferring from the image. Players speak in sequence, and each player’s clues become visible to subsequent players; however, their thought processes remain hidden. Switch to Self-play trainingSwitch to GRPO trainingProvide cluedata/votes StrategicGame Environment Clue Stage 👩 👨 👧 👿 Game Setting Spy gets a blank figand needs to guess what it looks like. Player 1 Player 1 Player 4 Performance on MathVision Vision-Zero: To verify this, we train Qwen2.5-VL-7B for 100 iterations on Gobang and our environment and evaluate on MathVision; results show that Vision-Zero effective generalization.Iterative-SPO:We introduce a novel two-stage training algorithm. 2.2 ITERATIVESELF-PLAYPOLICYOPTIMIZATION To enable sustained performance improvement within Vision-Zero, we introduce Iterative Self-Play Policy Optimization (Iterative-SPO) which is a novel optimization algorithm that alternates between self-play and RLVR. Eqa.1 ensures that the total reward between the spy and the civilians is zero, and that players receiving more votes are assigned lower rewards. RLVR in the Decision Stage.During this stage,the objective of each player is to correctly identify and vote for the spy.Since civilians share aligned information, they can be regarded as a single group. , nc, where sci can be index of player (indicating vote for the player as spy), or ∅ (indicating not clear who is spy and answer "n/a"): What Civilians SeeWhat Spy See Civ Win Spy Win 👩Civ 1 👨Civ 2 👧Civ 3 👿Spy Before TrainingAfter Training Figure 5:Visualization of spy reasoning in Vision-Zero.A comparison of model responses to identical scenarios before and after training, as evaluated by GPT-based scoring, reveals substantial improvements in planning, retrieval, decomposition, strategy formulation, and logical reasoning. Let mt ∈ {0,1}be the phase indicator (mt = 1 trains the CLUE stage, mt = 0 trains the DECISION stage). Decision→Clue:ifm t = 0and¯ acct ≥τ ↑ acc and¯ nat ≤τ ↓ na,then setm t+1 = 1;(9) Clue→Decision:ifm t = 1and  1−¯ acct ≥τ ↑ err or¯ nat ≥τ ↑ na  ,then setm t+1 = 0;(10) otherwise mt+1 =m t. With this gating, the per-iteration training loss is Lt =m t Lclue(θ) + (1−m t)L dec(θ), and gradients are applied only to the active module at iteration t. Token Length (Decision) Figure 6:Evolution of win rate and token length during Vision-Zero training.Win rates are evaluated over 100 rounds (50 civilian, 50 spy) against corresponding untrained reference models; civilians win by correctly identifying the spy. We compared our models against SOTA methods R1-OneVision-7B (Yang et al., 2025b), MM-Eureka-Qwen-7B (Meng et al., 2025), VLAA-Thinker-7B (Zhou et al., 2025), and OpenVLThinker-7B (Deng et al., 2025) (all post-trained via RLVR on human-labeled data), as well as ViGaL (Xie et al., 2025), which collects game data initially and subsequently training on them. Training and Hyperparameter Settings.We detail the hyperparameters used for Vision-Zero training below. Notably, all baseline methods rely on training with hundreds or even thousands of mathematics and reasoning samples. Cross-Capability Negative Transfer Mitigation.A key challenge in VLM post-training is cross- capability negative transfer, where models trained on specific tasks often perform worse on others. This demonstrates that Vision- Zero’s strategic, multi-capability training environment significantly alleviates negative transfer issues common in traditional single-capability training paradigms. Low Costs.Vision-Zero significantly reduces dataset construction costs and training time compared to traditional RLVR methods (Tab. In contrast, previous training methods typically require extensive human or model-generated chain-of-thought (CoT) annotations and answer labeling, consuming significant amounts of time and human resources. 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 3:Comparison of dataset construction costs, training costs and model performance across methods.Label Cost refers to the number of tokens generated by teacher or judging LLMs during data curation; for consistency, all token counts are recalculated using the Qwen2.5 tokenizer. To estimate training time cost, we refer to each baseline’s original paper to obtain the number of samples used during RL training, and multiply this by a standard GRPO cost per sample to simulate the expected time consumption under a fully fair setting. High Training Efficiency.Although Vision-Zero involves multi-round interactions, it does not introduce substantial training overhead. To empirically validate the training efficiency of Vision-Zero, we conducted experiments comparing the training time and efficiency of the original GRPO and Vision-Zero over the same number of iterations using identical hardware. Notably, despite differences in visual encoders, pre-training strategies, and training procedures between the QwenVL