REAL METHOD of "Path Channels and Plan Extension Kernels: a Mechanistic Description of Planning in a Sokoban RNN" (arXiv 2506.10138v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our work shows that, a precise understanding of the plan representation allows us to directly understand the bidirectional planning-like algorithm learned by model-free training in more familiar terms. They argue that the network exhibitsplanningbehavior since it is data-efficient in training, generalizes to multiple boxes, and benefits from additional compute. acting and that the plan changes more quickly during those steps, indicating that the policy seeks test-time compute when needed. We then analyze convolutional kernels, as well as activations’ evolution over time, to mechanistically understand the agent’s planning algorithm. 2.1 NETWORK ARCHITECTURE We analyze the open-source DRC(3,3) network trained by Taufeeque et al. The network consists of a convolutional encoder, a stack of 3 ConvLSTM layers, and an MLP head for the policy and RL value function prediction. The encoder block E consists of two 4×4 convolutional layers without nonlinearity, which process the H×W×3 RGB observation xt into an H×W×C output et with height H, width W , and C channels, at environment stept. ConvLSTM Layers.Figure 2b visualizes the computation of the ConvLSTM layer. Each of the ConvLSTM layers at depth d and tick n in the DRC maintains hidden states hn d , cn d with dimensions H×W×C and takes as input the encoder outputet, the previous layer’s hidden statehn d−1, cn−1 d , and its own hidden state hn−1 d from the previous step. The ConvLSTM layer computes four parallel gates i, j, f, ousing convolutional operations with 3×3 kernels that are combined to update the hidden state. For the first ConvLSTM layer (d= 0), the architecture uses the top-down skip connection from the last ConvLSTM layer (d= 2). This gives the network 3·3 = 9 layers of sequential computation to determine the next action at each step. DRC(3,3) architecture.The DRC(3,3) architecture applies the ConvLSTM modules as shown in Figure 2, encoding the observations xt then applying the ConvLSTM layers parameterized by θ1, θ2, 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 M L P (a) DRC(3,3) architecture ConvConvConvConvPool or concat encode (b) The ConvLSTM block Figure 2:Left: There are three layers of ConvLSTM modules with all the layers repeatedly applied three times before predicting the next action.Right: Note the use of convolutions instead of linear layers, and the last layer of the previous tick (hn−1 D ) as input to the first layer. and θ3 in sequence for three layers, then applying the same modules to the previous hidden states (i.e. Additional details.Additional architecture, training, and dataset details provided in Sections B and C. 2.3 QUANTITATIVE EVIDENCE Ablating the state.First, we tested our classification of channels as being path channels or non-path channels by performing a single-step cache ablation. This keeps the ablated channel’s activations more in line with what the network encounters during training, while removing the ablated channel’s ability to store plan information across multiple timesteps. In Section N we use the AUC values as the basis for a simple automatic labeling method which corroborates our findings on 4 additional random training seeds. Short-term channels have high AUC for up to 10 steps, while long-term channels show a high AUC for predicting actions beyond 10 steps until the end of the episode. To interpret the weights of the encoder, we use the associativity of linear operations to combine the convolution operations of the encoder output et at time t to the output gate on d for layer d tick n into a single convolutional layer. Both paths (down-then-right and right-then-down) are visible at step 0 tick 1 (left) due to the encoder; and the down and right channels have similar activations on the box square (gray). the training reward has a −0.1 per-step term, but the value encoded in the path channelsdo notcapture plan length at all. B NETWORK ARCHITECTURE The DRC architecture consists of an convolutional encoder E without any non-linearities, followed by D ConvLSTM layers that are repeated N times per environment step, and an MLP block that maps the final layer’s hidden state to the value function and action policy. The encoder maps the observation xt at timestep t to the encoded state et. While the plan nodes are present and updated across all the layers, this circuit only shows the short and long-term plan nodes in the first layer’s hidden state (L0HX) with a channel X for each direction up, down, left, and right. For the first ConvLSTM layer, the hidden state of the final ConvLSTM layer is used as the previous layer’s hidden state. C NETWORK TRAINING DETAILS The network was trained using the IMPALA V-trace actor-critic (Espeholt et al., 2018) reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm for 2·10 9 environment steps with Guez et al.’s Deep Repeating ConvLSTM (DRC) recurrent architecture consisting of three layers repeated three times per environment step, as shown in Figure 2. We saw in Figure 5 that the plan representation is updated by 19 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 50 0 50 Centered time steps (t) j 1 0 1 Avg activation (L1H17) 50 0 50 Centered time steps (t) o 50 0 50 Centered time steps (t) h ≈ σ(j) · tanh(o) H2: BACKTRACKING MECHANISM (a) Observation D1 D2D3 (b) All box channels step 1 tick 0 (c) L2H9 (right) step 5 tick 1 (d) L2I9 (right) step 5 tick 1 (e) L2O9 (right) step 5 tick 1 (f) L2H9 (right) step 9 tick 1 (g) L2H9 (right) Abl. step 9 tick 1 Figure 16:(a) 20×20 level we term as the “backtrack level” with key decision nodes D1-D3 for backward chaining.(b)The sum of box-movement channels at step 1 tick 0 indicates forward (from box) and backward (from target) chaining.(c-e)Activation of the box-right channel L2H9 involved in backward chaining at step 5 tick 1. By using redundant channels across multiple layers, the network can effectively move plan information several squares within a single time step’s forward pass (one square per relevant layer). M EMERGENCE OFPLANNINGSTRUCTUREDURINGTRAINING To understand when the planning mechanisms described in this paper emerge during training, we analyzed intermediate checkpoints saved throughout the 2 billion environment steps of training. 100 101 102 103 Training Steps (M, log scale) 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 Connection Strength Self-Connection vs Cross-Inhibition Strength Self-connection strength Cross-inhibition strength 100 101 102 103 Training Steps (M, log scale) 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 Normalized Self-Cross Difference WTA emerges 