REAL METHOD of "Riesz Neural Operator for Solving Partial Differential Equations" (arXiv 2303.02304v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Towards this end, we propose a coupled multiwavelets neural operator (CMWNO) learning scheme by decoupling the coupled integral kernels during the multiwavelet decomposition and reconstruction procedures in the Wavelet space. To build a data-driven model that can give a general representation of the interactions to efficiently solve coupled differential equations, we propose the coupled multiwavelets neural operator (CMWNO). The critical feature for neural operators is to model the integral operator namely the Green’s function through various neural network architectures. 1 arXiv:2303.02304v5 [cs.LG] 24 Jan 2025 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023 Fourier neural operator (Li et al., 2020b) uses an iterative architecture to learn the integral operator in Fourier space. The differential (B{Bt) and the integral ( ť Ω) operators can be represented by the first-order multiwavelet coefficients (s and d) of orthogonal bases via decomposition in the Wavelet space. As a representative problem for coupled systems in the real world, MFGs gains raising attentions in various areas, including economics (Achdou et al., 2014; 2022), finance (Gu´eant et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2019) and engineering (De Paola et al., 2019; Gomes et al., 2021), etc. Furthermore, (Liu et al., 2021) expands the feature-space in the kernel-based representations of machine learning methods and uses expansion coefficients to decouple the mean field interactions. In our work, we first introduce the neural operator into coupled MFG fields, which can decouple the various interactions inside the multiwavelet domain. • For coupled differential equations, we propose a coupled neural operator learning scheme, named CMWNO. To the best of our knowledge, CMWNO is the first neural operator work using pure data-driven method to decouple and then solve coupled differential equations. Specifically, we first yield the representation of coupled information during the decomposition process of multiwavelet transform. Then, the decoupled representation can interact separately to help the operators’ reconstruction process. In addition, we propose a dice strategy to mimic the information interaction during the training process. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023 • The proposed model successfully learns the interaction between the coupled variables when the couple degree is increasing and thus it could open new directions for studying complex coupled systems via data-driven methods. Specifically, CMWNO outperforms the best baseline (MWTc) by 54.0% on GS equations with various resolutions and outperforms the best baseline (FNO c) by 61.4% on non-local MFGs with different time steps. Therefore, the coupled high-order differential equations can be transformed into the first-order differential equations in the Laplace space which will reduce the decoupling difficulty. Given A and U as two Sobolev spaces Hs,p with są 0, p“ 2, let T denote a generic operator such that T : The interacted kernels cannot be directly solved without considering the interference from the other kernel, and our idea is to simplify the kernels first and deal with the interactions in the multiwavelet domain. Vk 0 consists of the orthogonal scaling functions φi with i“ 0, . Wk 0 consists of the orthogonal wavelet functions ψi with i“ 0, . Hs,2Ñ Wk n with Qk n“ P k n`1´ P k n , then an single operator T in our coupled system can be represented as: First, we make a mild assumption to decouple two coupled operators given in Section 2.1. 1, without loss of generality, we assume that we can build two operators Tu and Tv to approximate upx, τq and vpx, τq, where Tu and Tv are decoupled and do not carry any interference from each other. The assumption is mild and easy to get satisfied in the Wavelet space since the operators can be represented by the first-order multiwavelet coefficients. To model ϵ1pTuq and ϵ2pTvq, we transform the operators into multiwavelet coefficients in the Wavelet space and embed it through simple linear combination after the decomposition steps. Based on the concept of multiwavelets (Appendix Section C), here we simply explain the de- composition step and reconstruction step of multiwavelets in our coupled system. For a given function fpxq, the scaling/wavelet coefficients sn jl/dn jl of scaling/wavelet functions φn jl/ ψn jl are computed as: (6) Using the multiwavelet decomposition filters, the relations between the coefficients on two consecutive levels n and n` 1 are computed as (decomposition step): Repeatedly applying the reconstruction step, we can compute the coefficients sn l from s0 l and di l, i“ 0, . In general, the function can be parameterized as the scaling/wavelet coefficients in the Wavelet space after the decomposition steps, and the coefficients can be mapped to the function after reconstruction steps. In our work, to model the interference ϵ1pTuq and ϵ2pTvq, we obtain the multiwavelets coefficients of each kernel during the decomposition steps and embed them into the other kernel in the reconstruction step. Inspired by scheduled sampling (Bengio et al., 2015) , which is designed to gently bridge the discrepancy between training and inference sam- ples, we propose rolling the dice to randomly decide the interaction order between each neural operators, which is named dice strategy. Specifi- cally, we roll the dice for every sample to decide which path to use, which can effectively mitigate the imbalance update problem for each kernel caused by the fixed training order. In our proposed model, for each operator, the neural networks A, Band C use a single-layered convolutional neural networks while ¯T uses a single linear layer. The neural operators are trained using Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and decay of 0.95 after every 100 steps. The models are trained for a total of 500 epochs which is the same with training CMWNO for fair comparison. Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, 10(1):1–12, 2007. Computational methods for first-order nonlocal mean field games with applications. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 393:114778, 2022. A physics-informed operator regression framework for extracting data-driven continuum models.Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 373:113500, 2021. The trainable neural networks layer in this stage is composed of tAu, Bu, Cu, ¯Tuu and tAv, Bv, Cv, ¯Tvu. Moreover,tA˚, B˚, C˚u are all one-layer CNNs with the ReLU Nair & 