REAL METHOD of "Exploring Synthesizable Chemical Space with Iterative Pathway Refinements" (arXiv 2509.16084v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this problem, we introduce ReaSyn, an iterative generative pathway refinement framework that obtains synthesizable analogs to input molecules by projecting them onto synthesizable space. Specifically, we propose a simple synthetic pathway representation that allows for generating pathways in both bottom-up and top-down traversal of synthetic trees. We design ReaSyn so that both bottom-up and top-down pathways can be sampled with a single unified autoregressive model. Further, we introduce a discrete flow model that refines the generated pathway at the entire pathway level with edit operations: Experimentally, ReaSyn achieves the highest reconstruction rate and pathway diversity in synthesizable molecule reconstruction and the highest optimization performance in synthesizable goal-directed molecular optimization, and significantly outperforms previous synthesizable projection methods in synthesizable hit expansion. However, drug discovery pipelines are challenging and labor-intensive due to their vast design space and multi-objective nature. The sampling processes of the autoregressive model (the first and the second steps) and the Edit Bridge model are depicted in Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b), respectively. Using this representation, ReaSyn adopts a novel training and inference scheme that can enforce a specific traversal direction in a single encoder-decoder Transformer [37]. After the encoder encodes the input molecule, the decoder predicts the synthetic pathways of its synthesizable analogs.[START] and [END] tokens are omitted for simplicity.(a) Bidirectional synthetic pathway generation of ReaSyn.ReaSyn’s autoregressive model predicts the synthetic pathways in the sequential representation. • We propose ReaSyn, a framework that integrates bottom-up decoding, top-down decoding, and holistic editing to establish a multi-view pathway generation method for synthesizable projection. Various algorithms have been proposed to navigate the space to find synthesizable drug candidates, including autoencoders (AEs) [3], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [31], Bayesian optimization [24], genetic algorithms (GAs) [12], Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [35], and GFlowNets [25, 33, 7]. In addition, since they are typically a combination of a single-step reaction prediction model and a search algorithm, they cannot consider the entire pathway to optimize the end products for target chemical property. A reaction step is defined by converting the matching pattern in the reactant SMILES to a specified pattern in the product SMILES (e.g., using RDKit [26]), and the synthetic pathway𝑝 is defined as a specific ordering of these reaction steps. Given the aligned(𝑝0,𝑝 1)pairs, Edit Flow can be trained using a Bregman divergence loss. First, existing representations use molecular fingerprints to represent building blocks to handle largeℬ, but since the mapping between a molecule and its fingerprints is not bijective, there exists information loss in processing building blocks. Secondly, existing methods employ hierarchical representations that first determine the node/token type (i.e., building block or reaction) and then predict specific node/token features (i.e., building block fingerprints or the reaction class). Reasoning Synthetic Pathways in Bottom-up and Top-down Directions Bidirectional training and inference.Based on the developed notations 𝑝BU and 𝑝TD, we propose a simple yet effective training and inference scheme that does not require additional computational costs. Specifically, we adopt an encoder-decoder Transformer [37] where the encoder encodes𝑥 and the decoder aims to autoregressively generate𝑝. The dataset𝒟 consists of( 𝑥,𝑝 )pairs, and we randomly switch between 𝑝 = 𝑝BU and 𝑝 = 𝑝TD with a probability of𝑝 = 0.5during training to equip a single autoregressive model with the ability to handle both directions. The model is trained with the next token prediction loss. Importantly, since molecular blocks consist of multiple SMILES tokens while reaction blocks (and[START]/[END]) consist of a single token, we introduce a loss weighting scheme based on token type: Taking full advantage of its holistic and flexible nature, we propose adding a step to the cycle that provides another perspective on the generation. We propose Edit Bridge, an extension of Edit Flow that forms a bridge from a pretrained distribution towards the data distribution. In our paper, Edit Bridge is implemented using the same encoder-decoder Transformer [37] architecture as the autoregressive model, with additional heads to predict the edit operation rates𝑢𝜃 𝑡 (ins(𝑝,𝑖,𝑎)|𝑝),𝑢 𝜃 𝑡 (del(𝑝,𝑖)|𝑝), and𝑢 𝜃 𝑡 (sub(𝑝,𝑖,𝑎)|𝑝)(Eq. Since both (1) the sampling process of𝑝0 and (2) the alignment process that computes the edit operations converting 𝑝0 to 𝑝1 are computationally expensive, we prepare 10.5M training data (i.e., (𝑝0, 𝑝1) pairs and their align operations) offline. Synthesizable Molecule Reconstruction Setup.Even given a vast synthesizable space, previous synthesizable molecule generation methods have struggled to cover this space extensively. The cycle is proposed as an effective method for scaling test-time compute, and there is generally a trade-off between reconstruction rate and sampling time. Specifically, we use synthesizable projection of ReaSyn as an additional mutation operator of a genetic algorithm (GA) by projecting the offspring molecules after every reproduction step of Graph GA [22], thus ensuring all the resulting offspring molecules lie in the synthesizable space. introduction to methodology and encoding rules.Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 28(1):31–36, 1988. Given the aligned pairs, Edit Flow can be trained using a Bregman divergence loss: a classifier first predicts the token type, then depending on the outcome, either a fingerprint network predicts the building block or a classifier selects the reaction. Note that the first token after the[START] token (the first token sampled during inference) is always[MOL:START] and a reaction token in𝑝BU and𝑝 TD, respectively. For both models, we adopt the standard encoder-decoder Transformer architecture, following Gao et al.[14]. Specifically, the encoder has 6 layers, with a hidden dimension of 768, 16 attention heads, a feed-forward dimension of 4096, and the maximum sequence length of 256. The decoder has 10 layers, with a hidden dimension of 768, 16 attention heads, a feed-forward dimension of 4096, and the maximum sequence leng