REAL METHOD of "Universal Value-Function Uncertainties" (arXiv 2505.21119v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This is due to the training procedure employed in UVU: Theoretical guarantees of the latter are moreover often complicated by the use of training procedures like temporal difference (TD) learning with bootstrapping. To this end, we introduce universal value-function uncertainties (UVU), a novel method designed to estimate epistemic uncertainty of value functions for any given policy using a single-model architecture. Unlike previous methods, our design requires no training of multiple models (e.g., ensembles) nor separate value and uncertainty models (e.g., RND, ICM). Furthermore, we design UVU as a universal policy-conditioned model (comparable to universal value function approximators [Schaul et al., 2015]), that is, it takes as input a state, action, and policy encoding and predicts the epistemic uncertainty associated with the value function for the encoded policy. (1) The agent’s objective then is to maximize expected returns J(π) = ES0∼µ,A0∼π(·|S0)[Qπ(S0, A0)]. We first briefly recall the RND algorithm [Burda et al., 2019] , before introducing the neural tangent kernel (NTK) [Jacot et al., 2018] framework. The online predictor u(x; ϑt) is trained via gradient descent to minimize a square loss between its own predictions and the target network’s output on a set of data points X = {xi ∈ Rdin }ND i=1. The loss and error function of RND are then given as Lrnd(θt) = 1 2 (u(X ; θt) − g(X ; ψ0))2 , and ϵ2 rnd(x; ϑt, ψ0) = 1 2 (u(x; ϑt) − g(x; ψ0))2 . This limiting kernel, referred to as the neural tangent kernel (NTK), leads to analytically tractable training dynamics for various loss functions, including the squared loss L(θt) = 1 2 ∥f (X ; θt) − Y∥2 2. This expression provides a closed-form solution for the epistemic uncertainty captured by an infinite ensemble of NNs in the NTK regime trained with square losses. However, this analysis does not extend to value functions trained with TD losses and bootstrapping as is common in practical reinforcement learning settings. Q-functions are then optimized through gradient descent on a temporal difference (TD) loss given by L(θt) = 1 2 ∥ [γQπ(X ′ T D, θt)]sg + r − Qπ(XT D, θt) ∥2 2, (5) where [·]sg indicates a stop-gradient operation. 3 Universal Value-Function Uncertainties Our method, universal value-function uncertainties (UVU), measures epistemic value uncertainty as the prediction errors between an online learner and a fixed target network, similar in spirit to random network distillation [Burda et al., 2019]. Our method centers around the interplay of two distinct neural networks: (6) While the weights ψ0 of the target network remain fixed at initialization, the online network u is trained to minimize a TD loss using the synthetic reward rπ g . The evolution of the parametersθt under gradient descent with infinitesimal step sizes, also called gradient flow, is driven by the minimization of TD losses with d dt θt = −α∇θL(θt) , and L(θt) = 1 2 ∥ [γf (X ′, θt)]sg + r − f (X , θt) ∥2 2 . This identity is useful to our analysis as it delineates any converged function f (x, θ∞) trained with TD losses 9 through its initialization f (x, θ0). , nL = n trained with gradient flow to reduce the TD loss L(θt) = 1 2 ∥ γ[f (X ′, θt)]sg + r − f (X , θt) ∥2 2. Theorem 1 is significant as it allows us to formalize explicitly the expected behavior and uncertainties of neural networks trained with semi-gradient TD losses, including universal value function ensembles and the prediction errors of UVU. The distributional equivalence of these finite sample estimators provides theoretical motivation for using a multi headed architecture with shared hidden layers within a single UVU model and its use as an estimator for ensemble variances of universal Q-functions. All agents are trained offline and use the basic DQN architecture [Mnih et al., 2015] adapted for universal value functions, taking the task encoding z as an additional input to the state (details are provided in Appendix B). This result addresses our first research question regarding the practical effectiveness of UVU compared to ensembles and other baseline methods. Our approach scores 8 highly and outperforms many of the tested baselines with statistical significance, indicating that it is indeed able to effectively quantify value uncertainty using a single-model multi-headed architecture. Single model methods that aim to reduce the computational burden of ensemble methods typically operate as myopic uncertainty estimators [Burda et al., 2019, Pathak et al., 2017, Lahlou et al., 2021, Zanger et al., 2025] and require additional propagation mechanisms [O’Donoghue et al., 2018, Janz et al., 2019, Zhou et al., 2020, Luis et al., 2023]. 7 Limitations and Discussion In this work, we introduced universal value-function uncertainties (UVU), an efficient single-model method for uncertainty quantification in value functions. Our method measures uncertainties as prediction error between a fixed, random target network and an online learner trained with a tem- poral difference (TD) loss. Furthermore, while our approach estimates uncertainty for given policies, it does not devise a method for obtaining diverse policies and encodings thereof. We thus believe algorithms from the unsupervised RL literature[Touati and Ollivier, 2021, Zheng et al., 2023] naturally integrate with our approach. A.1 Learning Dynamics of UVU We begin by deriving learning dynamics for general functions with temporal difference (TD) losses and gradient descent, before analyzing the post training distribution of deep ensembles and prediction errors of UVU. A.1.1 Linearized Learning Dynamics with Temporal Difference Losses We analyze the learning dynamics of a function trained using semi-gradient temporal difference (TD) losses on a fixed dataset of transitions X , X ′. (14) We assume gradient descent updates with infinitesimal step size and a learning rate α on the loss L(θt) = 1 2 ∥ γflin(X ′, θt)sg + r − flin(X , θt) ∥2 2, (15) yielding the parameter evolution d dt θt = −α∇θL(θt). 16 A.1.2 Post Training Function Distribution with Temporal Difference Dynamics We now aim to establish the distribution of post-training functions f (x, t∞) when initial parameters θ0 are drawn randomly i.i.d. , nL = n trained with gradient flow to reduce the TD loss L(θt) = 1 2 ∥ γ[f (X ′, θt)]sg + r − f (X , θt) ∥2 2. We begin by introducing a column vector of post-training function evaluations on a set of test points XT , and the training data X and X