REAL METHOD of "Cooperative Sheaf Neural Networks" (arXiv 2507.00647v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this issue, we first introduce the notion of cellular sheaves over directed graphs and characterize their in- and out-degree Laplacians. We then leverage our construction to pro- pose Cooperative Sheaf Neural Network (CSNN). Oversmoothing occurs when stacking multiple GNN layers yields increasingly similar node representations, whereas oversquashing refers to the loss of information when carrying information through increasingly long paths — due to the compression of exponentially growing information into fixed-size vectors. To circumvent this limitation, we introduce the notion of directed cellular sheaves (Theorem 3.2) and define their in- and out-degree Laplacians (Theorem 3.3). Leveraging these notions, we propose Cooperative Sheaf Neural Networks (CSNNs). We introduce the notions of in- and out-degree Laplacians for cellular sheaves over directed graphs, which can be used to model asymmetric relationships between nodes. Towards this end, we introduce in Theorem 2.2 the spaces of 0- and 1-cochains. Now, for each ePE choose an orientation e“iÑj and consider the coboundary operator δ:C 0pG,FqÑC 1pG,Fq defined bypδXqe “F j⊴exj´F i⊴exi. Then, the sheaf Laplacian is defined by LF “δ Jδ. Flat vector bundles are special cases of vector bundles in which we assign an orthogonal map Oi to each node i and set Fi⊴e“O i for all e incident to i. First, we project the initial node features X into h channels using an MLPη, i.e.,X 0“ηpXqPR ndˆh. Then, NSD recursively computes Xt`1“p1`p1 nˆhbεqqdX t´σp∆ FptqpIbW 1,tqXtW2,tq,(3) where 1nˆh is an nˆh matrix of ones, ∆Fptq is the sheaf Laplacian at layer t, εPr´1,1s d is a (learned) vector scaling the features along each stalk dimension, σ is an element-wise non-linearity, and W1,t P Rdˆd,W 2,tPR hˆh are weight matrices. [2024] recently proposed flexibilizing message-passing GNNs by treating nodes as players that can choose how they cooperate with their neighbors. If LFpXqi does not depend on xj for any jPV neighbor of i, then LFpXqj“0 orL FpXqj“ ř j,i⊴e FJ j⊴eFj⊴exj. To accommodate directed edges (i.e., EĎVˆV ), we propose using cellular sheaves over directed graphs. A linear map Fi⊴ij :Fpiq ÑFpijq for each incident vertex-edge pair i⊴ij and a linear map Fi⊴ji :FpiqÑFpjiqfor each incident vertex-edge pairi⊴ji, calledrestriction maps. Then there are four, possibly distinct, restriction mapsF i⊴ij,F i⊴ji,F j⊴ij ,F j⊴ji . Given a directed graph with possibly asymmetric adjacency matrix A, the out-degree Laplacian is Lout :“D out´A and the in-degree Laplacian is Lin :“D in´A , with Din and Dout denoting the diagonal matrices containing in- and out-degree of nodes in VpGq . Thus, for each node i, we assign a source conformal map Si and a target conformal mapTi, and set Fi⊴ij“S i and Fi⊴ji“T i for all neighbors j of i. We design CSNN’s diffusion mechanism by composing the out-degree and the transposed in-degree sheaf Laplacians. We define a CSNN layer by augmenting the Euler discretization of our novel heat equation 9X“ p∆in FqJ∆out F Xwith linear transformations and a nonlinear activation functionσ: More precisely, for each node i, we define a source conformal map Si and a target conformal mapT i for all neighborjofi. The first step of each layer t consists of computing the conformal maps Ti,t and Si,t. In addition, we use Householder reflections [Mhammedi et al., 2017, Obukhov, 2021] to compute orthogonal maps and multiply them by a learned positive constant for each node. for undirected graphs, there is a single map Oi for each node i, where Oi“0 could only mean that i does not com- municate at all. (a) ifi does not listen, then its update cannot depend on xj,@jPV, j‰i ; and (b) if i has a non-propagating neighbor k, then 6 APREPRINT- FEBRUARY3, 2026 its update cannot depend on xk. Proposition 4.1.If the target map Ti is zero, thenppLin FqJLout FpXqqi “0 . If the source map Sk “0 for some neighborkofi, thenppL in FqJLout FpXqqi does not depend onx k. Given a graph paq we illustrate the consequences of preventing node3 from listening. In most GNNs, if t is the distance between two nodes i and j, then they can only communicate after t layers. Proposition 4.2.In each layer t, the features of a node can be affected by the features of nodes up to2t-hops. We also show in Theorem 4.3 that CSNNs with t layers are capable of making i and j communicate while ignoring all the other nodes on a path from i to j such that|j´i|ďt . Moreover, if we choose a path with nąt´1 nodes between i and j, then i receives the information fromjin thepn`1q-layer. In the first layer , must have zero source and target maps except for T3,1 and S4,1. If k“3 , thenppLin FqJLout FpXqq3“´2T J 4,1S4,1xp0q 4 , with xptq k denoting the feature vector of k at layer t, thus xp0q 4 will be the only feature vector to influencexp1q 3 ; b. in message passing neural networks through a bound on the Jacobian ˇˇˇBxptq i {Bxp0q j ˇˇˇďc t ˆAt ij, where t is the layer, c is a constant that depends on the architecture of the model, and ˆA the normalized adjacency matrix. Each layer of their model, CO-GNN, employs an additional GNN that chooses an action for each node. While recent works on SNNs learn restriction maps in an end-to-end fashion, there are also prior works in which they are manually constructed [Hansen and Ghrist, 2019] or computed as a pre-processing step [Barbero et al., 2022]. 2 3 4 5 6 7 80 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.60 0.38 0.21 0.16 1.0 0.41 0.77 0.29 1.0 1.0 0.70 0.19 0.14 0.09 0.08 r(the problem radius) Acc CSNN (train) GGNN (train) GAT (train) GIN (train) GCN (train) Figure 5: [2024], i.e, LFpXqi “ř i,j⊴e FJ i⊴eϕepFi⊴exi´F j⊴exjq, where ϕe :Fpeq ÑFpeq is a continuous function for each edge e, then saying that LFpXqi does not depend of xj means FJ i⊴eϕeFj⊴exj “0 . In the first layer, letS j andT vt´1 be different of zero and all other source and target maps equal zero. • If TiSj (in the in-Laplacian) and TiSj (in the out-Laplacian) are both close to 0, then the edge pj, iqdoes not exist • IfT iSj (in the out-Laplacian) andTJ i Ti are both close to 0, then edgepj, iqdoes not exist. If the number of GNN layers is set to 0, we use an MLP with two layers to learn the restriction maps. Otherwise, we adopt a GraphSAGE architecture with the specified number of layers. Parameter NeighborsMatch sheaf dimension 2 # layersr`1 # hidden channels 32 # of GNN layersr`1 GNN dimension 32 dropout 0.0 input dropout 0.0 activation Id left weights true right 