REAL METHOD of "Multi-Armed Bandits with Minimum Aggregated Revenue Constraints" (arXiv 2510.12523v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We design and analyze algorithms that either optimistically prioritize performance or pessimistically enforce constraint satisfaction. For each algorithm, we derive problem-dependent upper bounds on both regret and constraint violations. Similarly, budget-constrained scenarios give rise toknapsack bandits, where the objective is to maximize cumulative rewards while adhering to a fixed resource allocation [8, 9]. Additionally, fairness considerations may impose further constraints, such as ensuring equitable exposure across arms [10, 11] or guaranteeing minimum revenue thresholds for each arm [12]. (i)infeasibility, where the constraints cannot be satisfied; (ii)feasibility with high cost, where satisfying the constraints requires playing significantly suboptimal arms; and (iii)feasibility with moderate cost, where the performance 1 arXiv:2510.12523v1 [cs.LG] 14 Oct 2025 gap is small and balancing reward and constraint satisfaction is relatively easy. The problem studied in this work belongs to the broader class of constrained bandit problems, which have been investigated under various motivations such as safety [5], fairness [10], return-on-spend guarantees [16], conservative behavior [17, 18], and knapsack constraints [8, 19]. a first stream of research focuses on hard constraints where violations are strictly prohibited, for instance in the linear constrained bandits setting (see [6, 7]). An alternative approach relaxes the initial safe action requirement, allowing round-wise constraint violations while studying the fundamental trade-off between performance and constraint satisfaction, the two central metrics in constrained bandit problems. the first achieves O( √ T )regret with logarithmic constraint violation, while the second exhibits the inverse behavior. [20] introduced an algorithm for safe linear bandits to learn the optimal action defined by maxx∈Rd x⊤θ⋆ s.t.Ax≤b, achieving poly-logarithmic regret withO( √ T)constraint violation. in BwK, costs accrue until a fixed budget is exhausted, which inherently guarantees constraint satisfaction, whereas in our setting the constraint is stochastic and enforced only in expectation, allowing for trade-offs between regret and constraint violation. optimistic estimation enhances reward performance at the cost of higher constraint violations, while pessimistic 2 estimation improves constraint satisfaction but increases regret. Assuming strict feasibility characterized by a known Slater constantγ⋆, they introduce a primal-dual optimization algorithm and establishO( √ T /γ⋆)upper bounds on both regret and constraint violation. Consequently, our work is the first to bridge the gap between the non-contextual MAB with minimum revenue constraints studied in [12], and the contextual MAB frameworks with general stochastic constraints explored in [30, 31, 32]. We introduce two novel algorithms,OLPandOPLP, that seamlessly integrate linear pro- gramming with optimistic and pessimistic estimation techniques. These algorithms effectively navigate the trade-off between performance and constraint satisfaction, each capturing dis- tinct points along the Pareto frontier of these competing objectives. The proposed methodology extends naturally to a wide range of MAB problems that require enforcing global linear constraints. Indeed, the objective and constraint criteria do not penalize strategy that periodically violates then over-satisfies the constraint as long as it remains met over the whole trajectory. The characterization of the optimal solution can thus be decomposed into identifying the optimal active set of constraintsI ⋆ for LP(µ,µ ), then computing the best allocation that saturates these constraints. 4 Algorithms The learner’s objective is to find the optimal allocationw⋆ without prior knowledge of the true parameters µ. , Tdo 3Observe contextc t 4Setδ← 1/t 5w (t) = argmax w∈π|C| K LP(UCB(t),UCB (t)) 6Sample armk t ∼w ct (t) 7Receive rewardr t ∼µ kt,ct 8Updaten (t),ˆµ(t),ϵ (t) 9Update historyH t =H t−1 ∪ {ct, kt, rt} 10end We propose two algorithms that focus either on the performance or on the constraint violation. OLPadopts an optimistic approach by solving the underlyingLPproblem using UCB(t)as a parameter for both the objective function and the constraints. 5 Main results 5.1 Algorithm guarantees The following theorems provide regret and constraint violation guarantees forOLPandOPLP, highlighting their respective focus on reward performance and constraint satisfaction. OLPandOPLPenjoy regret guarantees that stand at two different points in the performance/constraint violation Pareto front.OLPprioritizes performance, achieving polyloga- rithmic regret, but may incur constraint violations as large asO( √ T ). In particular, when no arm saturates its constraint2(i.e |K ∩ I⋆| = 0), we recover polylogarithmic guarantees for both regret and constraint violations. In Theorems 5.1 and 5.2,ρ⋆ characterizes the speed at which each algorithm converges to the optimal set of saturated constraints, i.e., the point at whichIt =I ⋆. However, this comes at the expense of performance, as a portion of the allocation budget is diverted from non-saturating (typically high-reward) arms to those saturating their constraints leading to √ Tloss in performance. We propose in this section a lower bound which stresses this is not due to algorithmic design or analysis weaknesses but structural to theMAB-ARCsetting. Conclusion We introduced a novel contextual bandit problem with minimum aggregated reward constraints, along with analytical tools tailored to the structure of this constrained optimization problem. We proposed two algorithms that explore different regions of the Pareto frontier—one favoring performance, the other emphasizing constraint satisfaction. While our primary focus is on guaranteeing a minimum aggregated revenue per arm, the algorithmic and analytical framework generalizes naturally to broader constraint structures, such as ensuring that the cumulative reward from a subset of arms exceeds a given threshold—a formulation relevant in generic monitoring problems. Beyond primal-dual methods in bandits with stochastic and adversarial constraints. An efficient algorithm for contextual bandits with knapsacks, and an extension to concave objectives. In other words, for any armk in contextc, if the optimal allocation probabilitywk,c is strictly positive (wk,c > 0) and the arm’s revenuegk(µ,w )exceeds its minimum constraint λk (i.e., gk(µ,w ) > λk), then