REAL METHOD of "Conformal Prediction for Long-Tailed Classification" (arXiv 2507.06867v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose methods with marginal coverage guaran- tees that smoothly trade off set size and class-conditional coverage. First, we introduce a new conformal score function called prevalence-adjusted softmax that optimizes for macro-coverage, defined as the average class-conditional coverage across classes. Second, we propose a new procedure that interpolates between marginal and class-conditional conformal prediction by linearly interpolating their conformal score thresholds. We demonstrate our methods on Pl@ntNet-300K and iNaturalist-2018, two long-tailed image datasets with 1,081 and 8,142 classes, re- spectively. Beyond training good predictive models in this setting, an additional challenge for post-hoc uncertainty quantification is that most available examples of rare classes are used for model training, leaving these classes with few or zero holdout examples to use for calibrating uncertainty quantification methods. We propose a simple procedure calledINTERP-Qthat interpolates between CLASSWISECP and STANDARDCP in a literal sense by linearly interpolating their quantile thresholds. While methods like logit adjustment for long-tail learning (Menon et al., 2021) and focal loss for dense object detection (Lin et al., 2017) address class imbalance through reweighting or output adjustment to improve classification performance, designing robust prediction sets under long-tailed distributions remains understudied. Our methods can be readily adapted to other scoring functions but we focus on this score because alternatives like APS (Romano et al., 2020) and its variants produce larger sets and are primarily designed forX-conditional coverage, which is outside our scope. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1Conformal prediction Require:Score functions:X × Y →R, miscoverage levelα∈[0,1], calibration setD cal = {(Xi, Yi)}n i=1, test pointX n+1, threshold function ˆq:R n ×[0,1]→R |Y| Compute scores:S i ←s(X i, Yi)fori= 1, . We explicitly describe the meta-algorithm for conformal prediction in Algorithm 1. The existing methods, STANDARDand CLASSWISE, and the methods we will propose in the next section are instantiations of this meta-algorithm for the score functions and threshold functions described in Table 1. (4)1−α INTERP-Q ∗ any ˆqIQ (15)1−2α ∗Our methods We take two approaches to the problem of simultaneously achieving reasonable set sizes and reasonable class-conditional coverage in the long-tailed classification setting, each lead- ing to a method. TARGETING(WEIGHTED)MACRO-COVERAGE VIA A NEW SCORE We consider the population optimization problem of minimizing the expected set size subject to a macro-coverage constraint, min C:X 7→2Y E[|C(X)|]subject to MacroCov(C)≥β,(8) and its dual version maximizing macro-coverage subject to an expected set size constraint, max C:X 7→2Y MacroCov(C)subject toE[|C(X)|]≤κ(9) where MacroCov(C)is defined in (1) andβ≥0andκ≥0. In summary, the first method we propose is simply running STANDARDCP with thePASscore function (which we will refer to as STANDARDwithPAS), as this achieves the desired marginal coverage guarantee while (approximately) optimally trading off set size and macro-coverage. Classes in the truncated datasets have 100 test examples each, but we assume the test distri- bution of interest is equivalent to the (long-tailed) train distribution, so we compute marginal metrics by computing a weighted average of the class-conditional metrics where the weight for classyis the prevalenceˆp(y)computed ontrain. The base model is a ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) trained using the standard cross-entropy loss (see Appendix D.3 for similar results using focal loss (Lin et al., 2017), a loss designed for class-imbalanced settings). 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Metrics.We evaluate each set-generating procedureC:X →2 Y on a test dataset{(X T i , YT i )}N i=1 that is separate from the data used for model training (and validation) and calibration. STANDARD, as described in (4); CLASSWISE, as described in (6); and CLUSTERED(Ding et al., 2023), a method that targets class- conditional coverage in the many-classes setting by grouping together classes with similar score distributions and computing a single score threshold for each cluster. In compar- ison, our methods, which explicitly optimize for class-conditional or macro-coverage, consistently achieve better trade-offs than STANDARDCP. “At-risk averageˆc y” is computed as(1/|Y at-risk|) P y∈Yat-risk ˆcy and “not-at-risk averageˆcy” is computed analogously. First, we introduce prevalence- adjusted softmax (PAS) and its weighted variant (WPAS), score functions inspired by oracle solu- tions that optimally balance expected set size and (weighted) macro-coverage. Second, we propose INTERP-Q, a simple procedure that interpolates between STANDARDand CLASSWISECP to pro- vide a tunable compromise between small sets and strong class-conditional coverage. Broader impacts.The methods we introduce have the potential to benefit society in the mid- to long-term by improving uncertainty quantification on citizen science platforms like Pl@ntNet. Our methods increase the probability that prediction sets for rare or endangered species contain the true label while keeping the average set size under control. Empirically, we find that it does not do better than the simpler INTERP-Q procedure, but we still believe it is useful to present the method, as it may be preferable in settings where a marginal coverage guarantee is desired. A.2 THEFUZZY METHOD We now present thefuzzy classwise conformal prediction(FUZZY) procedure. Specifically, we map each classyto its number oftrainexamplesn train y , normalize, and then add a small amount of random noise to ensure that the uniqueness condition of Proposition 4 is satisfied with probability one:Π prevalence(y) =cn train y +ε y whereε y ∼Unif([−0.01,0.01]) independently for each fory∈ Y. We first demonstrate that it is an optimal solution and then that it is unique. LetC:X →2 Y be any other set-generating procedure that satisfies the constraint in (24). The second inequality comes from applying the equality stated in (29) to the first integral and then using the definition of Cas satisfying the constraint of (24) to lower bound the second integral. Uniqueness.LetC:X →2 Y be another optimal set-generating procedure, so it achieves the same objective value asC ∗, Z X ×Y 1{y∈ C(x)}g(x, y)dµ(x, y) = Z X ×Y 1{y∈ C ∗(x)}g(x, y)dµ(x, y),(30) and it is a fe