REAL METHOD of "MaskPro: Linear-Space Probabilistic Learning for Strict (N:M)-Sparsity on LLMs" (arXiv 2506.12876v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

rule-based layerwise greedy search, which suffers from considerable errors, and gradient-driven combinatorial learning, which incurs prohibitive train- ing costs. Furthermore, to mitigate the training instability induced by the high variance of policy gradients in the super large combinatorial space, we propose a novel update method by introducing a moving average tracker of loss residuals instead of vanilla loss. The first category encompasses rule- based approaches that bypass backpropagation by leveraging a calibration set to greedily minimize layerwise errors through the objective minm ∥wx−(m⊙w)x∥ 2 (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023). However, such handcrafted metrics inherently suffer from considerable gaps with the end-to-end loss, ultimately capping the potential effectiveness of these methods. Furthermore, we propose a novel PGE update to accelerate and stabilize the entire training process, which modifies the independent loss metric in vanilla PGE by the loss residuals with a moving average tracker. Experiments indicate that the proposed MaskPro can achieve significant performance improvements while maintaining memory usage comparable to rule-based methods, with substantially lower training overhead than MaskLLM. Moreover, the MaskPro method demonstrates remarkable robustness to data samples, which can achieve stable performance even withonly 1 training sample. • We propose an enhanced policy gradient that substitutes the raw loss in standard policy gradients with per-minibatch loss residuals. These methods leverage a prune-train process to effectively reduce the number of effective parameters while maintaining efficient training, bring a promising solution for the practical application and deployment of LLMs in the real-world scenarios. 3 PRELIMINARY 3.1 SEMI-STRUCTUREDSPARSITY The core idea of semi-structured sparsity aims to divide the entire weights w∈R d into groups of M consecutive elements and then retainNeffective weights for each group. Prior to that, we first review the state-of-the-art learning-based MaskLLM method (Fang et al., 2024). This reparameterized loss-driven mask learning method is highly effective on various LLMs, providing a innovative perspective for addressing this problem. 4 METHODOLOGY In this section, we present the details of our proposed MaskPro method. Then, in Section 4.2, we propose to adopt the backpropagation-free policy gradient for training. Moreover, we further refine the logits update via utilizing the loss residual with a smoothing tracker instead of vanilla loss metric, which enhances the effectiveness and stability of the learning process. Inspired by this finding, we design a novel continuous-relaxation framework named MaskPro for Eq.5, i.e., Firstly, we allocate a categorical distribution pi = (pi,1, . Ambiguity on Mask mt and Minibatch ξ.The policy gradient updates logits based on the loss metric, aiming to encourage the logits to select masks that result in lower loss values. However, when the loss variation caused by mask sampling is significantly smaller than the loss variation caused by changing the minibatch, the loss metric alone cannot effectively distinguish whether the current mask is beneficial or detrimental. For example, we denoteξlow as the minibatch whose loss is inherently low and ξhigh as the minibatch with high loss. Then we sample two masks and denote one that achieves lower loss bym good and the other bym bad. The first case is likely to hold in most cases, as a good mask can generally reduce the loss on most minibatches. We then sample 1000 masks and plot theirloss distributions, as shown in Figure 2. To address this issue, we propose to use the loss residual to update the logits, which can distinguish the loss variations independently caused by mask changes. (2011), we introduce a moving average tracker to evaluate the averaged loss residual under the current logits. This prevents aggressive logits updates caused by large loss variations, ensuring a more stable training process. At t-th iteration, we first reshape the logits πt into groups of M consecutive elements and then apply the softmax function to generate the corresponding probabilities pt. By calculating the loss residual on the corresponding minibatch ξ, we can obtain the independent impact of the loss value. gp =f(m⊙w, ξ)∇log (p(m|π)), gr = (f(m⊙w, ξ)−f(m 0 ⊙w, ξ))∇log (p(m|π)), gsr = (f(m⊙w, ξ)−f(m 0 ⊙w, ξ)−δ)∇log (p(m|π)), where gp is the vanilla PGE, gr is the update via loss residual and gsr is the update via loss residual with smoothing trackerδ. Furthermore, when f(m t ⊙w, ξ)> 1 2 f(m 0 ⊙w, ξ), from Eq.14 of Theorem 2, we know that before the loss of the sampling mask mt decreases to less than half of the initial one, using the update via loss residual with smoothing tracker can achieve more efficient training. Once the optimization process has sufficiently progressed such that the loss is less than half of the initial loss, a new set of m can be selected to replace m0 to continue efficient training. In practical experiments, this condition is almost easily satisfied, as the loss rarely drops below half of the initial value when training with an initial mask with simple priors. 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 Iteration 0.200 0.175 0.150 0.125 0.100 0.075 0.050 0.025 0.000 0.025 f(mt w, ) f(m0 w, ) Loss Residual Vanilla Policy Gradient Loss Residual with Smoothing Tracker (a) Training Effectiveness of Three PGE Updates. (a) We show the different loss curves trained with the three PGEs. The backpropagation-free methods perform sparsification by minimizing the layer-wise errors of the output activations caused by sparse weights, while MaskLLM updates the mask by optimizing masks through the loss function of the text generation task. To ensure a fair comparison, we use the C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2020) as a unified calibration or training dataset for each method and adopt theLM-evaluation-harnessframework (Gao et al., 2024a) for zero-shot evaluations. Optimizers.In Figure 3 (a), we evaluate the training performance of vanilla PGE, loss residual and loss residual with the smoothing tracker. Training Efficiency.We evaluate efficiency primarily by comparing memory usage, training time, and the size of the training dataset. Furthermore, we propose a novel PGE that replaces the vanilla loss metric with loss residuals, refined by a moving average tracker, effectively accelerating training and reducing varia