REAL METHOD of "Mitigating Semantic Collapse in Generative Personalization with Test-Time Embedding Adjustment" (arXiv 2506.22685v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our Test-time Embedding Adjustment (TEA) method consistently enhances text-image alignment across diverse personalization approaches (Textual Inversion, DreamBooth, and their variants) and architectures (Stable Diffusion, Flux). To address this, we propose a simple yet effective training-free method that adjusts the magnitude and direction of pre-trained embedding at inference time, effectively mitigating the semantic collapsing problem. Our method is broadly applicable across different personalization methods and demonstrates significant improvements in text-image alignment in diverse use cases. By enforcing a small rotation and rescaling in the text encoder’s latent space, we constrain the personalized token to behave more like a regular word, ensuring that it contributes to the image generation in balance with other tokens in the prompt. Our approach is lightweight and broadly compatible withalmost all existingpersonalization methods and demonstrates significant improvements in text-image alignment in diverse use cases. ❷ We propose the test-time embedding adjustment, a novel solution that requires no additional training, to mitigate SCP by aligning the learned embedding’s direction and norm with its original semantic concept. 2 SEMANTICCOLLAPSINGPROBLEM INGENERATIVEPERSONALIZATION 2.1 TERMINOLOGIES Given a set of personal imagesX and a pre-trained T2I modelϵθ, the goal of generative personalization is to identify a textual embedding v∗ associated with a specific verbalizable keyword V ∗ (e.g., ‘sks’, ‘<new>’, etc.). Comparison with Other Challenges in Generative personalization.First, we emphasise that SCP is not specific to the two representative methods we study (TI and DB), but is a general issue in personalization. To further verify this dominance effect, we introduce an additional set of simple prompts, denoted P simple V ∗ , which consists of 200 concise sentences such as ‘a photo of a V ∗’, ‘a portrait of a V ∗’, etc., where V ∗ is clearly the central concept. As training progresses, the learned embedding V ∗ reduces this context dominance, strengthening the representation of c. (left) TEA framework that adjusts the embedding on inference time where both U-Net and text encoder are just personalized pre-trained models. This raises a natural question:Can we reverse this semantic shift at test time by adjustingV ∗, without modifying the personalization method? A key advantage of this approach is that it is training-free and can be applied toalmost all existing personalization methods, regardless of whether it is based on Textual Inversion or DreamBooth. 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Embedding Adjustment.Given a pre-trained embedding matrix M that includes a learned token V ∗ (as in Textual Inversion), and a target concept c toward which we wish to regularise, we propose to adjust MV ∗ by aligning both its magnitude and direction with Mc. This is achieved by first normalising the vectors and then applying Spherical Linear Interpolation (SLERP) (Shoemake, 1985) to interpolate the direction of MV ∗ towards Mc, which is effective in high-dimensional vector spaces. More specifically, given a prompt ⌊p, V∗⌋ and a target prompt ⌊p, c⌋, we obtain the two embeddings τ(⌊p, V∗⌋) and τ(⌊p, c⌋)from the text encoder τϕ and then adjust the embedding of ⌊p, V∗⌋by using the above equation on every token in the prompt. This method enables a test-time adjustment of semantic drift without retraining, making it a lightweight and broadly applicable solution to mitigating SCP effects. 4 EXPERIMENTS In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of TEA on addressing the SCP across six represen- tative and recent personalization methods, two architectures (Stable Diffusion and Flux) and three datasets (CS101, CelebA, and Relationship) consisting of total 22 concepts. It systematically improves text–image alignment, generalizes across methods, datasets, and architectures, and provides qualitative corrections to baseline failure modes, establishing TEA as a robust and versatile component for personalization. We then train DreamBooth models using mixtures of masked and benign images, with varying proportions p∈ {0,0.2,1.0}, where p= 0 corresponds to standard DreamBooth, and p= 1.0 uses only masked data. To address this, we proposed a training-free test-time embedding adjustment (TEA) that realigns the personalized embedding with its original semantic context, significantly improving text–image alignment without modifying model weights. Our method is lightweight, broadly compatible with almost all existing personalization frameworks such as Textual Inversion and DreamBooth and their variants, and delivers substantial improvements in prompt consistency and image fidelity across diverse scenarios. Overall, beyond introducing SCP and proposing a practical solution, this work lays the founda- tion for further exploration of adaptive embedding adjustments, context-aware constraints during personalization, and new perspectives on the robustness of anti-personalization methods. Tuning-free multi-subject image generation with localized attention.International Journal of Computer Vision, pp. Textual Inversion and Dreambooth.While there are many personalization methods have been proposed, they can be traced back to the two representative methods: Mathematically, given a set of personal images X={x 1, x2,· · ·, xn} and a pre-trained T2I model ϵθ, the goal is to identify a textual embedding v∗ associated with a specific verbalizable keyword V ∗ (e.g., ‘sks’, ‘<new>’, etc.). Textual Inversion (TI) (Gal et al., 2022) is a pioneering method that proposes obtaining a textual embedding by minimising the following objective: Building on TI, Dreambooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) suggests fine-tuning not only the embedding v∗ (i.e., by fine-tuning the textual encoder τ) but also the model parametersθby minimizing the following objective: While such risks first surfaced with celebrities—whose data are abundantly available online—the rise of generative person- alization means that now anyone’s likeness can be misused, since high-quality personalized models can be trained from only a handful of images. This can be achieved through machine unlearning, which erases targeted concepts from the model (Gandikota et al., 2023; Schramowski et al., 2023; Bui et al., 2024b; 2025), or through parameter-editing methods that hide unintended capabilities without retraining (?). These methods apply imperceptible “masks” so