REAL METHOD of "A Schrödinger Eigenfunction Method for Long-Horizon Stochastic Optimal Control" (arXiv 2603.23173v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We identify implicit reweighting issues with existing eigenfunction learning losses that degrade performance in control tasks, and propose a novel loss function to mitigate this. We evaluate our method on several long-horizon benchmarks, achieving an order-of-magnitude improvement in control accuracy compared to state-of-the-art methods, while reducing memory usage and runtime complexity fromO(T d)toO(d). Additionally, it holds that error estimates for the deep FBSDE method worsen as T increases (Han & Long, 2020, Theorem 4), and for IDO methods using importance sampling the weight variance may increase exponentially in T (Liu et al., 2018). • Neural network-based approach for general gradient drift.For general gradient–drift dynamics, we introduce a hybrid neural-network method to approximate the optimal control efficiently: To eliminate this bias, we introduce arelativeeigenfunction loss, ∥Lψ/ψ−λ∥ 2, which removes the undesired weighting and robustly recovers the dominant eigenpair needed for control synthesis. • With this framework, we introduce a new procedure for solving SOC problems over long horizons by learning the operator’s eigenfunctions with neural networks. We show that existing eigenfunction solvers can be ill-suited for this task due to an implicit reweighting in the used loss, and propose a new loss function to remedy this. 4 NUMERICAL METHODS We propose a hybrid method with two components: In high dimensions, these methods often perform poorly, motivating deep learning approaches which differ from each other mainly in the loss function used. An overview of the deep leraning algorithm for learning eigenfunctions is given in Algorithm 1 in Appendix E. PINN lossBased on the success of physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019), one idea is to design a loss function that attempts to enforce the equation Lϕ=λϕ via an L2 loss, as done in Jin et al. The eigenvalue λ is typically also modeled as a trainable parameter of the model, or obtained through other estimation procedures. Variational lossA second class of loss functions is based on the variational characterization of the eigensystem of L. This motivates the loss functions RVar,1(ϕ) = ⟨ϕ,Lϕ⟩ µ ⟨ϕ, ϕ⟩µ +αR µ reg(ϕ),R Var,2(ϕ) =⟨ϕ,Lϕ⟩ µ +αR µ reg(ϕ).(17) The first of these, sometimes called thedeep Ritz loss, was introduced in E & Yu (2018), and the second was described in Cabannes & Bach (2024); Zhang et al. REMOVING IMPLICIT REWEIGHTING VIA RELATIVE LOSS Based on this observation, we propose to modify (15) to Rρ Rel(ϕ) = Lϕ ϕ −λ 2 ρ +αR ρ reg(ϕ).(20) 7 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 This loss function, which we call therelative loss, eliminates the implicit reweighting of the stationary HJB equation. Instead of learning V0 and λ0 jointly, a natural idea is to combine the benefits of the above loss functions by first training with a variational loss (17) to obtain an estimate for the eigenvalue λ0 and a good initialization of V0, and then ‘fine-tune’ using (20). 4.2 OUR HYBRID METHOD:COMBINING EIGENFUNCTIONS AND SHORT-HORIZON SOLVERS For both IDO and FBSDE methods, every iteration requires the numerical simulation of an SDE, yielding a linear increase in computation cost with the time horizon T . We propose to leverage the eigenfunction solution given in Theorem 3 in order to scale these methods to longer time horizons as follows: first, parametrize the top eigenfunction as ϕθ0 0 = exp(−βV θ0 0 ) for a neural network V θ0 0 , and learn the parameters θ0 using the relative loss, as well as the first two eigenvalues λ0, λ1 (see Appendix E). (22) This control can then be used in an IDO/FBSDE algorithm to optimize the parameters θ1 of the additive correction vθ1, a second neural network, near the terminal time. Detailed information on the experimental 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Method Algorithm/Loss Control objective EIGF (ours) Relative loss73.33±0.02 IDO Log-variance loss74.52±0.02 IDO Adjoint Matching74.69±0.02 IDO Relative Entropy75.63±0.02 IDO SOCM Did not converge Table 1: For theQUADRATICsettings, we can compute ∇logϕ 0 exactly, and see that the relative loss significantly improves upon existing loss functions for approximating this quantity (with the error measured in L2(µ)). For the other settings, the resulting control∇logϕ 0 yields the lowest value of the control objective for the relative loss. In Figure 5, we show the result of using the learned eigenfunctions in the IDO algorithm using the combined algorithm described in the previous section, and compare it with the standard IDO/FBSDE methods. The IDO method has constant performance in [0, T], and the combined method combines the merits of both to provide the lowest overallL 2 error. Table 1 reports the final control objective (mean±std) after80,000training iterations. We have investigated the use of deep learning methods to learn the eigensystem, introducing a new loss function for this task. We have shown how this approach can be combined with existing IDO methods, yielding an improvement in L2 error of roughly an order of magnitude over state-of-the-art methods in several long-horizon experiments, and overcoming the increase in computation cost typically associated with longer time horizons. The Galerkin method beats Graph-Based Approaches for Spectral Algorithms. C.7 IDOLOSS FUNCTIONS The IDO algorithm described in Algorithm 2 (Appendix D) is rather general, and a large number of algorithms can be obtained by specifying different loss functions. Adjoint lossThe most straightforward choice of loss is to simply use the objective of the control, and define R(u;X u) = Z T 0  1 2 ∥u(X u t , t)∥2 +f(X u t )  dt+g(X u T ).(88) This loss is also called therelative entropy loss. Thediscrete adjoint methodconsists of first discretizing the objective and then differentiating w.r.t. Finally, the derivative of the relative entropy loss (88) is then computed as ∂θR= 1 2 Z T 0 ∂ ∂θ ∥u(X ¯u t , t)∥2dt+ Z T 0  ∂u(X ¯u t , t) ∂θ T σ(t)a(t;X ¯u t ,¯u)dt,(92) where the notation ¯umeans that we do stop gradients w.r.t. Then the gradient of this loss w.r.t.θ is equal to (92), the gradient of the loss in the continuous adjoint method. The claimed benefit of this method is that the resulting loss is a simple least-squares regression objective with no importance weighting, allowing it to avoid the problem of high variance importance weights. D ALGORITHMS We give an overview of the algorithm used for eigenfunction lear