REAL METHOD of "Semantic-Enhanced Time-Series Forecasting via Large Language Models" (arXiv 2508.07697v8). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this issue, we propose a novel Semantic-Enhanced LLM (SE-LLM) that explores the inherent periodicity and anomalous character- istics of time series to embed into the semantic space to enhance the token em- bedding. Hence, we pro- pose a plugin module embedded within self-attention that models long-term and short-term dependencies to effectively adapt LLMs to time-series analysis. Our approach freezes the LLM and reduces the sequence dimensionality of tokens, greatly reducing computational consumption. Experiments demonstrate the supe- riority performance of our SE-LLM against the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Existing methods often convert temporal information into textual prompts to activate the potential of LLMs. (Zhou et al., 2023) processed time-series data by randomly initializing the embedding layer and directly performing serialized analysis through frozen LLMs. Most existing LLM-based methods mainly focus on token-level alignment (Hu et al., 2025), as shown in Fig. Regarding the semantic space composed of tokens and time steps, we propose the Temporal-Semantic Cross-Correlation (TSCC) Module to obtain enhanced semantics that represent temporal patterns, emphasize anomaly and de- anomaly patterns, thereby enhancing the interpretability of the token embeddings, as shown in Fig. the Temporal-Semantic Cross-Correlation (TSCC) module and the Time-Adapter architecture. • We propose a novel Temporal-Semantic Cross-Correlation (TSCC) module to enhance to- ken embedding by endowing semantic information with temporal patterns, which improves temporal analysis. However, the success of these fine-tuning techniques is highly contingent upon algorithmic design choices (Pan et al., 2024a; Zhou et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024), and the transferability of these methods across diverse time-series domains remains unclear. 3 METHODS 3.1 OVERVIEW OFSE-LLM The proposed SE-LLM model consists of two primary components: TS Embedding.The temporal representation is passed through the Time Encoder module, which projects the data into a high-dimensional TS Embeddings, which can be formulated as: Semantic Space.We construct the semantic space by projecting the word embedding matrix of the pre-trained LLM through a linear layer. Architecture of TSCC module, where DAand DCcorrespond to ”de-anomaly semantic” and ”anomaly semantic”. Firstly, we align the temporal embeddings with the semantic space through a cross-attention mechanism (Jin et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025; Chang et al., 2025). Given the cross-attention outputC, the encoder predicts the latent mean and log-variance, from which a latent variable is sampled via the reparameterization trick. Algorithm 1Anomaly Modeling via AM-V AE Module Require:Cross-attention output: An MLP is then employed to extract channel attention and enhance the semantic representations along the channel dimension: It comprises two linear layers and two LSTM modules, enabling effective capture of both long-term and short-term temporal dependen- cies. These paths process temporal dependencies by leveraging long-range information from the Transformer’s architecture through nonlinear transformations, thereby equipping the model with temporal data-handling ca- pabilities during training. Our method consists of four key operations executed sequentially. First, aLow-rank Projection is applied, where a linear layer learns a low-rank matrix to reduce the input dimensionality. Finally, a linear layer integrates these refined temporal dependencies into the key (k∈R B×N×C ) and value (v∈R B×N×C ) matrices of the self-attention mechanism, enhancing their capacity to model temporal relationships. For ETTh1 and Solar, where seasonal and trend components are pronounced, our method maintains competitive ac- curacy across different forecasting horizons. Some results are unavailable because several previous methods do not provide accessible code or cannot be applied to specific datasets due to design con- straints. Specifically, the M3 and M4 datasets present heterogeneous temporal patterns (e.g., ranging from quarterly to monthly or daily frequencies), and our approach benefits from strong generalization capability to model realistic tem- poral dynamics, even in the absence of direct training data for those patterns. Method SE-LLM AutoTimes FPT Dlinear PatchTST TimesNet FEDformerInformer Reformer M3→M4 13.024 13.036 13.125 15.337 13.228 14.553 15.047 19.047 14.092 M4→M3 12.560 12.750 13.060 14.030 13.390 14.170 13.530 15.820 13.370 In the zero-shot experiments, we compared our approach (SE-LLM) with several state-of-the-art methods (see Table 3) and found that SE-LLM achieves competitive and slightly better performance in zero-shot generalization. (2) The cross-domain attention mechanism is replaced with a simple linear layer for feature concatenation, thereby altering the approach to dynamic alignment and fu- sion across domains. All experiments were conducted with a batch size of 256 and a sequence length of 672, under which the training and inference times for each method were recorded under the same hardware and software environment. 6 compares the training and inference speeds of SE-LLM with classical algorithms, all evaluated on the same dataset, highlighting the superior efficiency of our method. In addition, the bubble chart illustrates the relationship between training speed and MSE variations on the ECL dataset when our approach is applied with different LLMs, further demonstrating the trade-offs between computational speed and prediction accuracy. A APPENDIX FORSE-LLM A.1 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS OF THETSCC PIPELINE The pipeline consists of several interdependent components such as cross-attention, AM-V AE, Structural prior infusion, and gating fusion. Cross-Modality Alignment.The first step is to align semantic embeddings with temporal tokens using a cross-attention mechanism. 3:Compute the cross-correlation matrix:{Normalize temporal and semantic representations and compute their correlations.} 4:M←Norm(mean(H))·Norm(S) T 5:Apply top-kfiltering:{Select the strongest temporal–semantic correlations as structural priors.} 6: DC←DC· 1 n Pn i=1 P(S i, mi top-k) 15 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 3Anomaly Pattern Modeling via AM-V AE 1:Input:Cross-attention outputCin the joint space. 3:Project the input into the latent space:{Encode the joint-space representation into latent fea- tures.} 4:V←Encoder(C) 5:Estimate the latent distribution:{Predict t