REAL METHOD of "DiffTrans: Differentiable Geometry-Materials Decomposition for Reconstructing Transparent Objects" (arXiv 2603.00413v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Typical methods are primarily tailored to specific scenarios, such as objects following a uniform topology, exhibiting ideal transparency and surface specular reflections, or with only surface materials, which substantially constrains their practical applicability in real-world settings. In this work, we propose a dif- ferentiable rendering framework for transparent objects, dubbedDiffTrans, which allows for efficient decomposition and reconstruction of the geometry and materi- als of transparent objects, thereby reconstructing transparent objects accurately in intricate scenes with diverse topology and complex texture. Despite achieving promising fidelity in novel views and scenes with complex object composition, these methods struggle to extract reliable meshes due to the lack of constraints on surface geometry, thus unable to deal with objects with intricate meshes (Wang et al., 2023). Finally, as the most crucial step, we design a recursive differentiable mesh ray tracer to further optimize and refine the geometry, index of refraction and absorption rate of the transparent objects in a unified and end-to-end manner. (Chen et al., 2023) developed a mixture of DMTet (Shen et al., 2021) and neural network to achieve a robust mask-only training procedure. Similar to previous methods, we adopt a progressive training strategy to achieve more stable results. To miti- gate potential noises during training, we apply smoothness regularizationL smooth to the depthdand normalnof the objects in the screen space by penalizing the first and second-order gradients. Unlike previous works (Li et al., 2020) which utilize feed-forward approach to recover the transparent objects, our method reconstructs these objects in an analysis-by-synthesis manner that adheres to a series of physical laws, ensuring the reality of reconstruction. The radiance of the reflected and refracted rays are then blended using the values ofR ′ i andT ′ i computed from Equation (7) and Equation (8). For each ray that intersects with the object from the interior, follow the steps in 4), and the radiance is attenuated based on the accumulated absorption rate from the origin to the intersection point, as formulated in Equation (11). Lmat-smooth = 1 N X vi |µt(vi)−µ t(vi +ξ i)|.(16) The total training loss is defined as the weighted sum of all individual losses in the form of: 4 EXPERIMENT We evaluate our method on both synthetic and real-world datasets. We compare ourDiffTranswith NeRRF (Chen et al., 2023), current state-of-the-art method for transparent ob- ject reconstruction, and NeRO (Liu et al., 2023), the re- cent method for inverse rendering. OurDiffTransoutperforms other methods on most metrics, demonstrating the superiority of our approach. Figure 6 shows that our method is robust under different IoR settings. Please refer to Section A.6 of the appendix for ablation studies for other components of our method, and the qualitative results of the ablation study of the tone regularization. Extensive ex- periments have demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, especially towards transparent objects with intricate topology and texture. We will investigate further improvement to relax the assumptions, thereby improving the robustness of our method in future works. 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A APPENDIX A.1 DETAILS ONGEOMETRYINITIALIZATION Geometry initialization constitutes a critical first step in our proposed method, aiming to derive an initial geometry estimation solely from object masks and camera parameters to enhance training stability. Fully implicit methods that rely on MLP optimization may encounter discretization errors and fractured topologies, while explicit methods often struggle to handle topology changes during training without imposing additional constraints (Mehta et al., 2022). Implicit methods which use MLP for prediction typi- cally exhibit slower training speed and often lead to overly smooth surfaces, while explicit methods such as space carving tend to have poorer generalization capabilities. First, we utilize FlexiCubes as the iso-surface representation, which is optimized by rasteriz- ing the extracted differentiable mesh and minimizing the loss between the rendered results and the ground truth mask. To mitigate potential training instabilities and noise arising from the ill-posed nature of the mask, we impose constraints on smoothness, mesh quality, and SDF during training. A.1.2 OPTIMIZATION At each training iteration, we obtain the object’s mesh from its grid representation, then we apply nvdiffrast (Laine et al., 2020) for differentiable rasterization at training views. Firstly, the areas within the mask do not receive any gradient from the mask lossLgeo-init and therefore remain stable after being filled. To ensure a more consistent mesh structure and avoid the occurrence of pits on the surface, we introduce a series of regularization techniques to mitigate the excessive gradients that may arise at grazing angles in our mask loss. The first regularization step involves penalizing the average distance between the mesh vertices and their respective primal faces: Besides that, we also employ mesh developability lossL dev introduced in (Stein et al., 2018) to encourage flatness and keep hinges and L1 loss on grid weightsL L1 to avoid local minimum. In addition to the methods described in the main paper, we incorporated several regularization strategies during training to further enhance the model’s generalization ability and robustness. A.2.1 OPTIMIZATION V olume Regularization.As discussed in the main paper, our method models the material of trans- parent objects explicitly by directly render under the Lambert-Beer’s law, which is a highly ill-posed process. Overall Loss.The overall loss function for the ray tracer is defined in the form of summation of the lossL total introduced in the main paper and the regularizations: Given the complexity of di- rectly optimizing the explicit geometry, we propose a carefully structured training scheme during the initialization phase, spanning 1000 iterations. We achieve this by primarily employing dilation loss and smoothness loss, which help form a continuous mesh while maintaining geometric smoothness. •Quality Improvement.Finally, the quality of the geometry is enhanced further by incor- porating additional losses, such as developability loss, to refine and improve the surface structure. During this phase, we leverage object masks