REAL METHOD of "Robustness in Text-Attributed Graph Learning: Insights, Trade-offs, and New Defenses" (arXiv 2510.17185v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To ad- dress these limitations, we introduce a unified and comprehensive framework to evaluate robustness in TAG learning. 1) models have inherent robustness trade- offs between text and structure, 2) the performance of GNNs and RGNNs depends heavily on the text encoder and attack type, and 3) GraphLLMs are particularly vulnerable to training data corruption. To overcome the identified trade-offs, we introduce SFT-auto, a novel framework that delivers superior and balanced robust- ness against both textual and structural attacks within a single model. CV! Cora, CiteSeer,PubMed, ArxivWikiCSHistory, Photo,ComputerInstagram,Reddit Inductive &Evasion InferenceTraining Adaptive I attack the defender’s modelMy exactly used model is attacked This paper focus on CVand …This paper focus on NLP and … TrainTestAttacked Figure 1: By subjecting these models to a unified threat model, we provide a unified evaluation methodology that serves as a foundation for understanding model vulnerabilities across diverse architectures and attack settings. 2) We find that previously underrated methods, such as GNNGuard (Zhang & Zitnik, 2020), achieve surprising performance when re-evaluated in TAG settings with advanced text encoders. Specifically, when the training data is compromised, GraphLLMs experience a more signif- icant decline in performance than GNNs. To achieve balanced robustness against both attacks, we propose a novel SFT (supervised fine-tuning) framework, SFT- auto, which employs multi-task training with a detection-prediction pipeline. , C−1}N , the learning objective is to predict labels of target nodesy target, givenGand ground-truth labelsy train. For GNNs, the modelffirst employs a text encoder to transform eachs i into a node-level feature matrixX, and then processed jointly with the adjacency matrixA. Following LLMNodeBed (Wu et al., 2025), we adopt RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) as the text encoder for GNN-based methods and Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023) as the backbone for GraphLLMs, as these configurations yield opti- mal performance. Due to space lim- itations, we report the average rank, which is derived for each method by averaging its ranks across all datasets where it has valid results, with full numerical results available in Appendix I. Simple Methods Can Shine in TAGs through Advanced Text Encoders.Despite their simplic- ity, RGNNs from earlier research can deliver surprisingly strong performance when re-evaluated in TAGs. In the context of TAGs, where advanced text encoders are 5 Preprint utilized, methods like GNNGuard can be revitalized to achieve near-SOTA robustness. The robust diffusion process in spectral methods enables flexible use of higher-order neighborhoods, thereby enhancing training robustness. This suggests that GraphLLMs are more vulnerable to perturbations in the training set, relying heavily on high-quality training text to maintain strong performance. Architecture Effect.As shown in Figure 4(Left), models with different architecture exhibit a clear text-structure robustness trade-off. Noise-Injection Methods.Drawing inspira- tion from GRAND (Feng et al., 2020) and NoisyGCN (Ennadir et al., 2024), we inject targeted perturbations during training to re- duce the distribution gap between training and adversarial test conditions. Training.The training phase employs a principled data augmentation strategy to endow the model with attack recognition and recovery capabilities. Robust training methods modify the learning process to enhance resilience, exemplified by GRAND (Feng et al., 2020) and NoisyGCN (Ennadir et al., 2024). Deep self- attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers.Advances in neu- ral information processing systems, 33:5776–5788, 2020. HeuristicAttack (Li et al., 2023).A scalable DICE-style heuristic (“Disconnect Internally, Con- nect Externally”) with training-aware constraints that prioritizes edges involving training nodes and degree-based node selection, approaching gray-box poisoning MetaAttack (Z ¨ugner & G¨unnemann, 2019) performance via distribution shifts maximization. •Constraint synthesis:define the forbidden set as{current label} ∪ {neighbor labels}; compute the allowed label set over all classes. step sizeϵ= 0.01for100epochs; sequential injection steps of0.2 with ATDGIA strategy. D DETAILS OFDEFENSEMETHODS D.1 INTRODUCTION OFDEFENSEMODEL For GNNs and RGNNs, we have the following methods as baselines. Graph Attention Network employing multi-head attention mechanisms for adaptive neighborhood aggregation. Hidden dimension reduced by factor of 8 due to multi-head attention •Training epochs: D.2.3 GRAPHLLMS WITHNOISYTRAINING This subsection covers noise injection strategies across different GraphLLM architectures in Section GraphGPT with Noise.GraphGPT incorporates noise injection through graph-level modifica- tions using the noise utils framework. For structural noise, 10% probability of adding random unconnected nodes as fake neighbors to high- degree nodes during neighbor selection for each training sample. D.2.4 SFTWITHSIMILARITYCONSTRAINTS SFT-simp.The similarity variant teaches the model to selectively use neighbor information based on similarity constraints through prompt engineering: The pseudo-code of the algorithm is pro- vided in Algorithm 1, and the related prompts are listed below. Attack Detection 10foreachv i ∈V test do 11ifLOWSIMILARITYNEIGHBORS(v i, τ)≥ |Ni|/2then 12I struct ← Istruct ∪ {i}; 13ifM(v i) =“text attacked”then 14I text ← Itext ∪ {i}; // Stage 2: Recovery and Final Prediction 15foreachv i ∈V test do 16ifi∈ I text then 17y pred[i]← M(neighborsonly(vi)); 18else ifi∈ I struct then 19y pred[i]← M(vi,filtered neighbors(vi, τ)); 20else 21y pred[i]← M(vi,N i); 22returnM,y pred 28 Preprint We introduced the WTGIA methodology and basic settings in Section C.3. F.1 RESULTS OFGNNGUARD UNDER DIFFERENT TEXT ENCODERS In Figure 7, we plot the performance of GNNGuard against structure evasion attacks using different text encoders. F.2 DIFFERENCEBETWEENTEXT-ENCODERS To understand why the text encoders significantly affect the performance of GNNGuard, we system- atically evaluate the effectiveness of different text embedding methods for similarity-based edge fil- tering, which is essential for its defense mechanism. Second, in real-world scenarios where training data integrity can be more readily ensured, applying aggressive thresholds during training risks excessive edge filtering, thereb