REAL METHOD of "Faster Gradient Methods for Highly-smooth Stochastic Bilevel Optimization" (arXiv 2509.02937v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Recent work proposed the first-order method, F2SA, achieving the ˜O(ϵ−6)upper complexity bound for first-order smooth prob- lems. Based on this observation, we propose a class of methods F 2SA-pthat usespth-order finite difference for hyper-gradient ap- proximation and improves the upper bound to ˜O(pϵ−4−2/p)forpth-order smooth problems. The first efficient algorithm BSA Ghadimi & Wang (2018) for solving the stochastic bilevel problem leverages both stochastic gradient and Hessian-vector-product (HVP) oracles to find anϵ-stationary point ofφ(x). (2023) proposed the first fully first-order method F2SA that works under standard SGD assumptions on bothfandg(Assumption 2.1). If we interpretλas the Lagrangian multiplier, then Problem (3) can be viewed as the Lagrangian function of the constrained opti- mizationmin x∈Rdx ,y∈Rdy f(x,y),s.t. More importantly, by directly leveraging gradient oracles instead of more expensive HVP oracles, the F 2SA is more efficient in practice (Shen et al., 2025a; Xiao & Chen, 2025; Jiang et al., 2025) and is also the only method that can be scaled to32B sized large language model (LLM) training (Pan et al., 2024). (2023) proved that the F 2SA method finds anϵ-stationary point ofφ(x)with ˜O(ϵ−3) first-order oracle calls in the deterministic case and ˜O(ϵ−7)stochastic first-order oracle (SFO) calls in the stochastic case. (2025b) showed the two-time-scale stepsize strategy improves the upper complexity bound of F 2SA method to ˜O(ϵ−2)in the deterministic case, which is optimal up to logarithmic factors. It remains open whether optimal rates for stochastic bilevel problems can be achieved for fully first-order methods. Our novel interpretation in turn leads to straightforward algorithm extensions for the F2SA method. Observing that the forward difference used by F 2SA only has a first-order error guarantee, a natural idea to improve the error guarantee is to use higher-order finite difference methods. Motivated by this fact, we propose the F2SA-palgorithm and show that it enjoys the improved ˜O(pϵ−4−2/p)SFO complexity, as formally stated in Theorem 3.1. The SFO complexity of different methods to find anϵ-stationary point forpth-order smooth first-order bilevel problems with condition numberκunder standard SGD assumptions. We refer to the problem class that jointly satisfies all the above Assumption 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 as first-order smooth bilevel problems, for which (Kwon et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2025b) showed the F2SA method achieves the ˜O(ϵ−6)upper complexity bound. the first one aims to learn the optimal weights of each sample in a corrupted training set, and the second one aims to learn the optimal regularizer of each parameter. Letℓ val be the logistic loss of the linear model on the validation set andℓ i tr be the logistic loss on the training samplei. Letℓ val andℓ tr be the logistic loss of the linear model on the validation set and training set, respectively. (7) The jointly second-order smoothness (7) ensures that the hyper-objectiveφ(x)has Lipschitz con- tinuous Hessians, which further allows the application of known techniques in minimizing second- order smooth objectives. (2025b) also proposed a fully first-order method to achieve the same ˜O(ϵ−1.75)complexity. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3 THEF 2SA-pMETHOD To introduce our method, we first recall the prior F 2SA method (Kwon et al., 2023) and establish their relationship between finite difference schemes, which further motivates us to design better algorithms by using better finite difference formulas. Then the fully first-order hyper-gradient estimator (Kwon et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025b) is exactly using forward difference to approximate∇φ(x), that is, ∂ ∂x ℓν(x)− ∂ ∂x ℓ0(x) ν ≈ ∂2 ∂ν∂x ℓν(x)|ν=0 =∇φ(x).(9) However, the forward difference is not the only way to approximate a derivative. (8) that ∂2 ∂ν∂x ℓν(x)|ν=0 =∇φ(x), we propose a fully first-order estimator via a linear combination of ∂ ∂x ℓjν (x)to achieveO(ν p)approximation error to∇φ(x)given that ∂p+1 ∂ν p∂x ℓν(x) is Lipschitz continuous inν. 3.2 THEPROPOSEDALGORITHM Due to space limitations, we only present Algorithm 1 designed for evenpin the main text. The algorithm for oddpcan be designed similarly, and we defer the concrete algorithm to Appendix D. In the outer loop, the algorithm first samples a mini-batch with sizeSand uses Lemma 3.1 to constructΦ t via the linear combination of ∂ ∂x ℓjν (xt)forj=−p/2,· · ·, p/2every iteration. After obtainingΦ t as an approximation to∇φ(x t), the algorithm then performs a normalized gradient descent stepx t+1 =x t −η xΦt/∥Φt∥with totalTiterations. It suffices to approximatey ∗ jν (xt)to sufficient accuracy, which is achieved by taking a K-step single-batch SGD subroutine with stepsizeη y on each functiong jν (x,·). Remark 3.1(Effect of normalized gradient step).Compared to (Chen et al., 2025b; Kwon et al., 2023), the only modification we make to the outer loop is to change the gradient step to a normalized gradient step. Run Algorithm 1 ifpis even or Algorithm 2 (in Appendix D) ifpis odd. We compare our proposed method F2SA-pwithp∈ {2,3,5,8,10}with both the previous best fully first-order method F 2SA (Kwon et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025b) and other Hessian-vector-product-based methods stocBiO (Ji et al., 2021), MRBO and VRBO (Yang et al., 2021). To demonstrate the potential of our methods on nonsmooth nonconvex problems, we also provide additional experi- ments on a 5-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) network with ReLU activation in Appendix F. 6 CONCLUSIONS ANDFUTUREWORKS This paper proposes a class of fully first-order method F2SA-pthat achieves the ˜O(pϵ−4−2/p)SFO complexity forpth-order smooth bilevel problems. We also com- plement our result with anΩ(ϵ −4)lower bound to show that our method is near-optimal when p= Ω(logϵ −1/log logϵ −1). In addition, it will also be interesting to further improve the convergence rate of our methods by combining them with variance-reduction (Fang et al., 2018; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019) or momentum techniques (Fang et al., 2019; Cutkosky & Mehta, 2020). A new first-order meta-learning algorithm with convergence guarantees.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03682, 2024. On the complexity of first-order methods in stochastic bilevel optimization. On penalty methods for nonconvex bilevel optimization and first-order stochastic approximation. First-order penalty methods for bilevel optimization.SIAM Journal on Optimization, 34(2):1937–19