REAL METHOD of "Common Corpus: The Largest Collection of Ethical Data for LLM Pre-Training" (arXiv 2506.01732v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

THELARGESTCOLLECTION OF ETHICALDATA FORLLM PRE-TRAINING Pierre-Carl Langlais∗ Pavel Chizhov∗ † Catherine Arnett∗ ‡ Carlos Rosas Hinostroza∗ Mattia Nee∗ Eliot Krzystof Jones∗ Ir`ene Girard∗ David Mach∗ Anastasia Stasenko∗ Ivan P. Yamshchikov∗ † Correspondence:pierre-carl@pleias.fr ABSTRACT Large Language Models (LLMs) are pre-trained on large amounts of data from different sources and domains. This underscores the need for truly open pre-training data that complies with data security regulations. In this paper, we introduce Common Corpus, the largest open dataset for LLM pre-training. The dataset contains a wide variety of languages, ranging from the high-resource European languages to some low-resource lan- guages rarely represented in pre-training datasets. We train two small language models on Common Corpus and find that they perform comparably to other models of their size, indicating that our dataset is suitable for multilingual pretraining. PleIAs/common_corpus 1 INTRODUCTION Large Language Models demand large amounts of training data. GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) is considered the first “large” language model. Trained on 300 billion tokens, GPT-3 introduced a standard training data pipeline shared by nearly all language models to date: Until 2025, LLM training data sizes have grown logarithmically. The latest generation of publicly documented language models including DeepSeek v3 (Liu et al., 2025), Gemma 3 (Kamath et al., 2025), Llama 4 (Meta, 2025) or Qwen 3 (Yang et al., 2025) have been trained on 14-36 trillion tokens. Even “small language models” (Wang et al., 2025) rely on large amounts of training data to fit scaling laws: Qwen 3 0.6B was trained on 36 trillion tokens, which is 3,000 times more than Chinchilla-optimal estimates (Hoffmann et al., 2022). As data quality has increasingly been an area of concern, the collection, maintenance, processing, and filtering of data has become one of the main costs in language model training. NLP practitioners have relied on the protection of fair use, claiming that the transformative nature of the use of the data allows them to leverage this data to train language models. The New York Times sued OpenAI for copyright infringement, alleging that OpenAI trained their models on NYT articles (Roth, 2023; Pope, 2024). Due to concerns about indirect commercial exploitation, many rightholders have implemented either hard technical measures or legal provisions against model training. Restrictions not only affect LLM pre-training but also the quality of search engine indexation and a variety of research projects that analyze and collect content at scale. Previously reproducible research artifacts have been removed or taken down, impacting pre-training data, continuous pre-trained models, and evaluation datasets. Books3, which has been used to train numerous models, faced legal challenges (Brittain, 2023). The LAION dataset was demonstrated to contain CSAM (Birhane et al., 2021; Thiel, 2023), and taken down (LAION, 2023), and then re-released once suspected CSAM was removed (LAION, 2024). The Dutch model GEITje was taken down (Rijgersberg, 2025), due to complaints about training on the Dutch Gigacorpus, in order to avoid legal disputes. These takedowns and legal challenges also represent a sizeable loss of investment for developers, who are often independent or small research organizations. This is largely due to changes in content owners’ and hosts’ preferences, which are changing to no longer allow scraping, especially for the purposes of training AI models. For each language, we chose a city that is located in the region where this language is most specific to. Common Corpus has grown to become the largest fully open pre-training dataset at about2 trillion tokensand the only one in its size range having high multilingual diversity. We attribute this discrepancy to anopen data paradoxas major sources of open content are paradoxically little visible online and even more so in the leading pre-training sources. We also train two small language models on our dataset and find that it offers comparable performance to existing multilingual models. To achieve this, models must be trained on datasets that are free from copyright or other legal limitations. This is currently a limitation of existing open datasets for training LLMs. Common Corpus, therefore, provides valuable training tokens that will not be subject to the same restrictions. Therefore, it contributes to data diversity in the open pre-training data ecosystem. Common Corpus aims to support the pre-training of fully open and auditable LLMs by making it legal to release the source even without the provision of fair use. We argue this is the first point in time where there has been sufficient knowledge and infrastructure to collect and clean a dataset on this scale, which meets the legal and ethical criteria we have outlined. 3 RELATEDWORK Table 1 illustrates the similarities and differences between prominent open pre-training datasets and Common Corpus. PleIAs/Pleias-350m-Preview 2Language distribution was computed using the fastText language identification model. we focused on large PDF sets, whereas agnostic crawl pipelines mostly retrieve HTML pages (e.g., abstracts from scientific papers). The remaining sources have been collected on a resource-by-resource basis using APIs and other standard retrieval methods whenever available. We first removed files that were not in our desired set of languages and formats according to their file extensions, including SVG files containing mostly encoded shapes, data storage formats: First created in 2011, Wikidata hosts 100 million documented items and several billion factual statements encoded as RDF triples. While Common Corpus is only large enough to train small models currently, the tools and methods we used to identify and curate the data may be used to expand the amount of permissively licensed open data. Although we used these methods responsibly and mitigated many issues overlooked by the counterparts (e.g., with toxicity detection), none of the curation methods could naturally facilitate a hundred percent accuracy. The token counts are presented in terms of our BPE tokenizer used to train the models described in Section 6, which was trained on a representative subsample of Common Corpus. The training data for OCRonos consists of a diverse multilingual set of OCR-processed texts drawn from Open Culture and Open Government. Each head is a