REAL METHOD of "AdS-GNN - a Conformally Equivariant Graph Neural Network" (arXiv 2505.12880v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

coordinate transformations that preserve angles, play a key role in many fields, including physics, mathematics, computer vision and (geometric) machine learning. We then build upon the fact that such isometric transformations have been extensively studied on general geometries in the geo- metric deep learning literature. We employ message-passing layers conditioned on the proper distance, yielding a computationally efficient framework. We validate our model on tasks from computer vision and statistical physics, demonstrating strong performance, improved generalization capacities, and the ability to extract conformal data such as scaling dimensions from the trained network. The construction of equivariant neural network archi- tectures that encode specific symmetries has powerful advantages both conceptual and computational. Diverse applications also exist in computational geometry and computer vision (see e.g. Our approach acts on point clouds and lifts the data into an auxiliary higher dimensional space called Anti de Sitter (AdS) space. We validate our construction on some tasks drawn from computer vision and statistical physics. However, despite progress in handling Euclidean symmetries, scale equivariance, or even these more general Lie groups, these methods do not address the full conformal group, which uniquely includes non-affine special conformal transformations. The pursuit of scale equivariance, a critical component of conformal symmetry, is perhaps the closest related area to our work on full conformal equivariance, with various approaches developed from specialized convolutional architectures [18, 19] to techniques like Fourier layers for robust scale handling [20]. AdS-GNN lifts points from Euclidean space to Anti de Sitter space and computes message passing conditioned on the proper distance. This is why we introduce the definition with xϕ in this way. These (d + 1)(d + 2)/2 parameters then assemble into an element of O(d + 1, 1), see e.g. Consider the submanifold given by the constraint ∥Y ∥ = −1, where Y ∈ Rd+1,1. the one which has Y 0 > 0, and we define: Indeed, a general framework for constructing convolutional layers that are equivariant under isometry groups of any pseudo-Riemannian manifold was given in [11, 13], and our work can be viewed as building on a special case of that. To be more precise, we first place explicit coordinates X = (X 1, . We can now solve the hyperboloid constraint equation 4 in terms of these coordinates as Y 0 = + z 2 1 + 1 z2 (1 + dX a=1 xaxa) ! > 0, Y a = 1 z xa, Y d+1 = z 2 1 − 1 z2 (1 − dX a=1 xaxa) ! . A first attempt from the correspondence of symmetries shown in (7) is to simply embed each of the points directly into the boundary z = 0, i.e. We instead determine a value of zi for each point using an approach outlined in Algorithm 1. We first embed each point into AdS using X µ i = (xa i , z= z0) (10) with a small regulator z0. For each point, we then compute the AdS center of mass ˆX = (ˆxi, ˆzi) of its klift nearest neighbours. It can be computed easily using an approach due to Galperin [34] which we review in Appendix A.2. We then perform a final embedding of the point using this z value, i.e. image data) the input feature will have∆ = 0 and this step may be skipped. To orient ourselves, we recall first an earlier model, that of E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs) [36, 37]. Note that by conditioning on AdS proper distance, we introduce a notion of locality both in ordinary space and in scale (as represented by the z coordinate). classification) we can now aggregate the information in a permutation-invariant manner by summing over nodes as usual at the final layer. computer vision tasks and an application to the Ising model in statistical physics. 5.1 Computer vision tasks SuperPixel MNIST We benchmark AdS-GNN on the super-pixel MNIST dataset [ 39], which consists of 2D point clouds of MNIST digits segmented into 75 superpixels. The task is to assign a shape class to each point in the cloud. We believe that this happens as the training data contains structure at different sizes to which AdS-GNN adapts more efficiently than EGNN, particular when there is a small number of training points. This model is exactly solvable, and the N-th moment of the energy operator10 can be computed to be ⟨ϵ(ζ1)ϵ(ζ2) · · ·ϵ(ζN )⟩ = Pf  1 ζi − ζj  1<i,j<N 2 (16) with Pf the Pfaffian and where ζi = xi + iyi is a representation of points in R2 as complex numbers. Left, test accuracy of shape segmentation as a function of the number of training points. Middle, relative L2 as a function of the number of training points, with system size fixed at N = 16. Right, loss as a function of system size with 8192 training points. We create a training dataset where we sample the coordinates of input points uniformly in [−2, 2] for various values of N and use the correlation functions from equation 16 as the training data. We expect that the information on the cabc is encoded in the successfully predictive models trained above, and it is very interesting to ask how it could be usefully extracted. Gu, “Computational conformal geometric methods for vision,” in Handbook of Mathematical Models and Algorithms in Computer Vision and Imaging: In particular, we provide information on how a a model trained on a given number of nodesNtrain performs when evaluated on a different number of nodes Ntest. Shapes Given a point cloud, we predict for each point to each shape it belongs (circle, square, triangle, intersection). We use relative L2 error as our training objective. Generalization across system size; each square shows the relative L2 loss of a system trained on a system of size Ntrain (x-axis) when tested on a system of size Ntest (y-axis) for different level of graph connectivity. For this we compute its Jacobian matrix (differential), which, in matrix form, is given as: Then we define the de Sitter space and the anti-de Sitter space and the (projective) zero quadric associated to (V, η) as: