REAL METHOD of "AutoDV: An End-to-End Deep Learning Model for High-Dimensional Data Visualization" (arXiv 2304.13037v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

ABSTRACTAn end-to-end machine learning (ML) lifecycle consists of many iterative processes, from data preparation and ML model design to model training and then deploying the trained model for inference. We design an algorithm based on the core set to compute similarity for large-scale, high-dimensional data efficiently. why do we need a version management system for the end-to-end ML lifecycle? When building an end-to-end ML lifecycle, we need to deal with many possible choices for data preparation, ML algorithms, training hyper-parameters, and deployment configurations. How to save time and computation in building an ML pipeline for a new training dataset; and How to efficiently retrain for new unseen data during the ML lifecycle. To build an ML pipeline for a training data (e.g., COCO dataset), an ML engineer will need to try with many data transformation techniques, ML model algorithms, training hyper-parameters, and inference config- urations to achieve the final target (e.g., the highest testing accuracy). We experimented with 4 Nvidia Titan GPUs, each with 24GB GPU memory, then the training time for just one ML pipeline is around 12 hours. The ML engineer can use some automated ML algorithms such as NAS-FCOS [43] to automatically find an ML pipeline, but the search cost for a training data is very high, 28 GPU-days, which is inefficient in production. To quickly build a lifecycle for the ML problem, we propose thelifecycle transferring algorithm, which uses the dataset similarity to transfer lifecycle versions of similar datasets. Our solution is inspired by transfer learning methodology in which we can transfer the whole ML pipeline to a similar dataset to save training time but still get high performance. To solve it, we propose representing each dataset as a small core set that can cover its distribution to efficiently compute similarity for each pair of datasets in the V eML system. On the other hand, retraining is needed, then we need to construct a new ML lifecycle for the new testing data version. In this paper, we propose to compare the core set of both testing and training data versions to detect data distribution mismatch without getting labeled test data, which is human cost saving. We achieve this by allowing ML engineers to choose from various incremental training methods and V eML will automatically rebuild a new ML lifecycle after that. •We propose an algorithm based on the core set to effi- cient comparing large-scale and high-dimensional data versions. Some popular model re- training methods are full training which retrains all available datasets, and transfer learning which only retrains the new dataset from a pre-trained model. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE Our system architecture has three main blocks and other functional modules. We leverage the OpenMMLab framework to perform ML training with training data from a data version, model algorithm configurations from a model version, and return trained model checkpoints for a training version. Amodel versionincludes a specific ML algorithm (e.g., features transformation, model architecture) to learn from the training data. Atraining version maintains a set of training hyper-parameters used to optimize the ML model, the training logs, and the trained model. Thetraining version managementmodule maintains train- ing hyper-parameters, training logs, and the trained model of each training experiment. For example, in the full training method, we merge the new testing data version with the previous training data version to be full training data (thanks to our data version management). Then we can reuse the previous model and training versions to train on new training data for a new ML lifecycle. At first, we introduce an efficient dataset similarity solution for large-scale, high-dimensional data based on the core set computation algorithm. It computes meta characteristics for each dataset (i.e., statistical features), then ranks all datasets by L1 distance in the meta-feature space, and finally chooses k nearest neighbors. 2) ML Lifecycle Versions Transferring Algorithm To support ML lifecycle transferring with a new training data, we compute the distance between the new one with existing datasets managed in our system via the core set. Algorithm 2 shows the steps to find the similar datasets in our V eML system for a new training datasetD. We reuse the Algorithm 2ML lifecycle versions transferring algorithm Require:D, {G 1,G 2, ...Gt },f // Compute k-center core set forD P= k-center(f(D)) // Compute pairwise distance betweenPand {G1,G 2, ...Gt } d1 = pairwise-distances(P,G 1) d2 = pairwise-distances(P,G 2) ... Firstly, it is required to learn embedding for each data sample of a spatiotemporal dataset using a neural network to be able to apply the core set algorithm. We leverage an autoencoderarchitecture [5] to train and learn the embedding for a dataset. These lifecycle versions are then transferred to build ML lifecycle for traffic speed dataset #2 (speed sensor data in the Bay area, USA) using the same data preparation, model algorithm, and learning rate of training version. LimitationsThe first problem with our method is the dataset similarity by core set selection. DATA DISTRIBUTIONS MISMATCH UNSUPERVISED DETECTION We propose an algorithm to automatically detect data distri- bution dissimilarity between a testing data version and the training data version without getting labeled data. Figure 8 illustrates the data distribution of training and testing data ver- sions and how to detect their dissimilarity using our method. Driving data versions in the first column act as the training data, and data versions in the first row play as the new testing data.Gand∆(G)are computed using a 10-center greedy algorithm. ML LIFECYCLE REBUILDING METHODS From above experimental results with pairs of training and testing data versions, we need to retrain the model when a TABLE 10.Object detection results with pairs of training and testing data versions. •Full Training Method.An ML engineer labels all data points ind∗and creates a full training data versiond ′ = merge (d 1,d 2,...,d k ,d∗) in our system. Then, he or she creates a new model versionm∗, a new training ver- siont∗fromm n andt p versions, respectively (since full training method uses the same model architecture and training hyper-parameters for retraining). A Version Management System for End-to-End Machine Learning Lifecycle •Transfer Learning Method.An ML practitioner s