REAL METHOD of "Aurora: Towards Universal Generative Multimodal Time Series Forecasting" (arXiv 2509.22295v6). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we introduce Aurora,the first Multimodal Time Series Foundation Model, which supports multimodal inputs and zero-shot inference. Pretrained on Cross-domain Multimodal Time Series Corpus, Aurora adaptively extracts and focuses on key domain knowledge contained in corresponding text or image modalities, thus possessing strong cross-domain gen- eralization capability. Through tokenization, encoding, and distillation, Aurora extracts multimodal domain knowledge as guidance and then utilizes a Modality- Guided Multi-head Self-Attention to inject them into the modeling of temporal representations. 1 INTRODUCTION Time series forecasting has gained sustained attention for decades of years due to its significant values in multiple domains, including economy, transportation, meteorology, and public health. Through learning the inherent dynamics within the raw data, deep learn- ing models can outperform classic statistical methods (Box & Pierce, 1970; Mei et al., 2014) and obey the scaling law (Shi et al., 2024a; Yao et al.). 1) pre-training on cross-domain time series corpus for unimodal time series foundation models, which partially possess cross-domain generalization capabilities; 1 arXiv:2509.22295v6 [cs.LG] 9 Mar 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Cross-Domain Multimodal Time Series Corpus time time time time Time Series Forecasters A traffic flow time series of a major urban highway in Los Angeles. Pretrained End-to-End Unimodal Multimodal Initialized Backbone PatchTST TimesNet Pathformer DLinear CALF TATS GPT4MTS TimeVLM Aurora (Ours) Sundial ROSE LightGTS VisionTS Initialized Backbone Pretrained Backbone Pretrained Backbone ...... Aurora is pretrained oncross-domain multimodaltime series corpus, supporting both text and image information to enhance zero-shot time series forecasting. 2) utilizing cross-modality information in train- ing end-to-end multimodal supervised mod- els, which effectively integrates domain knowl- edge in forecasting. Some of them (Shi et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2025e) are pretrained on trillion-scale corpus with heavy backbones, thus possessing certain cross-domain adaption capabilities. In our view, theauroraof next-generation time series foundation model lies in pretraining a cross-modality model on cross- domain time series corpus, which canutilize the domain knowledge within modalities and serve as a versatile out-of-the-box forecaster in complex scenarios. See Figure 1, we proposeAurora, which pioneers the exploration of multimodal time series founda- tion model. Specifically, we pretrain Aurora on Cross-Domain Multimodal Time Series Corpus, with time series data and sample-wise, domain-specific text descriptions. Considering the model architecture, Aurora adopts a novel cross-modality Encoder. Taking pretrained Bert (Devlin et al., 2019) and ViT (Liu et al., 2021) as modality encoders, Aurora then adopts token distillation to extract the key information in different modalities. To effectively model the cross-modality interaction, we propose a novelModality-Guided Self-Attention Mechanismto utilize the external domain knowl- edge to adjust the attention of internal information within the time series data to obtain temporal features, and then fuse them with text and image features. First, we use a ConditionDecoder to generate multimodal conditions for flow matching. Since the future trend of time series is often implied by external text information, and the inherent periodicity of time series is often contained in the endogenous images, we then design a Prototype Bank initialized by Period and Trend prototypes, and leverage a PrototypeRetriever to retrieve the “future prototypes” based on the inherent domain knowledge from texts and images. • We propose a multimodal time series foundation model, called Aurora, which is pretrained on cross-domain multimodal time series corpus and supports generative probabilistic forecasting. Through effectively fusing multimodal information during pretraining, Aurora serves as a strong zero-shot forecaster, and can make accurate cross-domain inference. • We devise a novel cross-modality encoder in Aurora, consisting of token distillation and modal- ity guiding, implemented by merticulously-designed attention structures. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • We design a novel flow-matching process in the Aurora Decoder. The majority of them adopt Tranformer-based architectures, which are pretrained on time se- ries corpus of billion- or trillion- scale to obtain the strong generalization capabilities. In this work, we propose Aurora to pioneer the exploration of multimodal time series foundation models. Through pretraining on Cross-Domain Multimodal Time Series Corpus, Aurora can extract the key domain knowledge within the text and image modalities to enhance the modeling of temporal features. 3 AURORA In this work, we pretrain Aurora in a cross-modality paradigm, which adopts Channel- Independence (Nie et al., 2023) on time series data, and models corresponding multimodal inter- 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Here’s the stock price series of NVIDIA. time periods time image time text TextEncoder VisionEncoder Tokenizer Tokenizer Tokenizer MSA Add&Norm Add&Norm FFN Q K V VisionDistiller TextDistiller ... 3.1.2 TOKENDISTILLATION After obtaining the tokens from all the modalities, the hidden representations of texts and images are then generated through the pretrained VisionEncoder (ViT) and TextEncoder (Bert): ˜X image =VisionEncoder(X image)∈R nimage×dimage ,(8) ˜X text =TextEncoder(X text)∈R ntext×dtext (9) Inituitively, there exists informative redundancy in texts and images for multimodal time series fore- casting. First, we capture the correlations between the time series modality and others through Cross-Attention based VisionGuider and TextGuider: Q=X time ·W Q, K=X time ·W K, V=X time ·W V (15) S= (Q·K T +Corr)/ √ dtime, O=Softmax(S)·V,(16) Onorm =LayerNorm(X time +O),(17) Xtime =LayerNorm(FeedForward(O norm) +O norm),(18) whereW Q, WK, WV ∈R dtime×dtime .X time ∈R ntime×dtime denotes the generated temporal representations. The last token ofX f useis first copiedFtimes and fed to the Causal-Transformer to generate the future conditionsX cond ∈R F×d time , then we adopt a Cross-Transformer integrated with RoPE (Su et al., 2024) to further refine them intoX cond ∈ RF×d time , whereX f useis set as Key and Value embeddings. Algorithm 1Prototype-Guided Flow Matchi