REAL METHOD of "Self-Improving Vision-Language-Action Models with Data Generation via Residual RL" (arXiv 2511.00091v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose Probe, Learn, Distill (PLD), a three-stage plug-and-play framework that improves VLAs through residual reinforcement learning (RL) and distribution-aware data collection. after broad pre-training, models are adapted to downstream applications by training on curated instruction–response pairs, yielding many improvements in language following, safety, and generalization (Ouyang et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2025). Motivated by these challenges, we introducePLD, a three-stage post-training pipeline.Stage 1: We propose a post-training pipeline that enables VLA models to improve autonomously without relying on addi- tional oracle demonstrations. Our method achieves near-saturated 99% success rates on the LIBERO benchmark, and delivers over 50% performance gains in SimplerEnv, underscoring both its effective- ness on seen tasks and its ability to generalize to unseen ones. Lettingx t = (o t, gt), the canonical objective is the behavior cloning (BC) loss. In contemporary VLA systems, the loss instantiation depends on the action head architecture. With recent work improving efficiency via action chunking and parallel decoding, and a continuous action parameterization trained by anℓ 1 regression objective (Kim et al., 2025). Flow-matching heads learn a continuous velocity field to transport a prior to the action distribution, trained with anL 2 flow-matching loss, and are often paired with VLM backbones for semantically grounded control (Black et al., 2024; 2025). 3 METHODS Method OverviewWe study the synergy between data produced by our method when a modest generalistVLA serves as the policy prior. We then collect expert databy letting the residual “take over” after specified steps of “base policy probing”. During training, the offline and online experiences will be replayed symmetrically; for example, mini-batches consist of equal samples from both buffers, ensuring that the value function is constantly trained on high-value state-action pairs. In practice, we train a task-specific residual action moduleπ δ(·|s, ab)conditioned ona b ∼π b. In contrast, a residual Gaussian policy can be easily trained through any off-the-shelf off-policy RL algorithm. Importantly, we do not explicitly enforce behavior constraints to policy loss, such that the resulting expert¯πis less influenced by either data quality or base policy performance. We first rollout the base policy for random steps, then let the learned residual RL policy to take over, resulting in demonstration trajectoriesτdemo ={(s 1, ab,1), . Accordingly, we boost the robustness of the RL expert by training the RL expert on an initial state distributions 0 ∼p πb 0 given by random steps of base policy probing. Unless stated otherwise, all methods use identical data volume, training budgets, augmentation, and hyperparameters across architectures; the default base policy we used isπ 0 (Black et al., 2024). For the pre-training stage, we collect a dataset of 50 trajectories per task, containing only the successful trials of the same base policy (π0), and using Cal-QL (Nakamoto et al., 2024) as the default pre-training algorithm. We plot the training curve of250k steps of online interaction, showing mean rollout performance and 95% CIs (confidence level) across 3 seeds in Figure 5. Table 1 and Table 2 list the performance gain achieved by further applying our method. Concretely, we fine-tuneπ 0 via SFT using data drawn from the disjointcoverage subsets of LIBERO-90 in proportions{0.1,0.3,0.6,0.8,1.0}; for each coverage level, we randomly sample tasks to form a new subset in distribution and then evaluate all tasks in the suite. To constructPLDdata, we first train residual RL specialists independently on each LIBERO-90 task, then aggregate their successful rollouts. Data collection and policy training.We first collected 200 teleoperated trajectories to perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of the base policyπ 0. After at most 8 hours of training for each 9 Pick Up the Red Cube Pick Up the Blue Cube Plug in the Peg One Model to perform the following tasks -SFT Figure 9:Real-world Generalization Performance.We evaluate one model’s multi-task perfor- mance on three language-conditioned manipulation tasks, including pick-and-place and peg inser- tion. PLD Data (Ours)RL Rollout DataBase Policy Rollout Data Figure 10:Visualization of different data sources.We plot 20 trajectories for each method (task prompt: As shown in Figure 10, we plot 50 trajectories for each method (task description: We choose task 0-9 from LIBERO-90, change the steps we used to initialize the random sample, initiat- ing stepsT base ∼[0, αT]to rollout the base policy. The VLA training procedure is typically analogous to VLM training. Then, the model is supervised with next-token-prediction tasks on diverse pretraining datasets, spanning across multi-modal web data (Black et al., 2025) such as COCO (Chen et al., 2015) and VQAv2 (Goyal et al., 2017), and robotics-specific, cross-embodiment data (Khazatsky et al., 2025; O’Neill et al., 2024). Offline-to-online transfer (Vecerik et al., 2017; Nair et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021; Nakamoto et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2025) considers a two-stage pipeline that first initializes policy or critic using pessimism or constrained objective in offline RL Levine et al. 5.3 VLAPOST-TRAINING The prevailing large-scale recipe for VLA post-training is topretrainon diverse, heterogeneous robot data and thenfine-tuneon task-specific demonstrations (Zhou et al., 2024a; Black et al., 2024). Because such post-training data are expensive to acquire, the authors note that most diversity must come from the pretraining mixture—underscoring a key limitation of pure SFT: We considerPLDas a practical step toward autonomous, scalable post-training and a foundation for future work on multi-embodiment transfer, continual on-robot learning, and safety-constrained data collection. 17 A ALGORITHM Algorithm 1PLDwith base-policy initialization Require:π b,π δ,Q ϕ,Q ϕ′,α,γ,B offline,B online # Initialization Collectnsuccessful trials ofπ b:D of f line={τ 1, τ2, . π(st) = abase, t < T base abase +a δ, t≥T base foreach SFT stepdo updateπ b by BC objective. For the online phase, it discards offline data and warms up the replay buffer with 50k steps of pre-trained policy rollouts. The key step is to fit astate valueV ψ byexpectile regressionover the actions of the dataset and then bootstrapQ θ toward this value. Critic pre-trainingWhile w