REAL METHOD of "Music Flamingo: Scaling Music Understanding in Audio Language Models" (arXiv 2511.10289v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To improve the model’s reasoning abilities, we introduce a post-training recipe: Architecturally, training practices for most music LLMs or captioners still constrain holistic learning – for example, the use of encoders (like CLAP (Elizalde et al., 2022)) that do not capture spoken content or low-level features like pitch in their representations (see our study in Appendix G), thereby constraining learning of vocal timbre, lyrical alignment, and expressive nuances in songs. To build Music Flamingo, we re-imagine the scope of music understanding and recast conventional tasks, such as music captioning and question answering, into comprehensive formulations that demand deliberate, step-by-step reasoning (Fig. To support this reframing, we introduce new strategies for both data curation and model training. First, we presentMF-Skills, a dataset with 4M+ high- quality samples for training music-understanding models. We propose a multi-step labeling pipeline that yields detailed, multi-aspect, layeredcaptions – capturing harmony, structure, timbre, lyrics, and cultural context – designed to elicit musician-level reasoning. On the modeling side, we first identify core limitations in Audio Flamingo 3 and continue-pre-training it to build a stronger backbone by fine-tuning it on multilingual, multi-speaker ASR and extended audio reasoning datasets before specializing it for music. Next, we propose a post-training stage specifically designed to enhance reasoning. Finally, we apply GRPO-based reinforcement learning with custom rewards, enabling explicit step-by-step musical reasoning. (i)Encoder-only ALMs, which learn a joint embedding space for audio and text, enabling tasks like cross-modal retrieval. (ii)Encoder–decoder ALMs(often called Large Audio–Language Models, LALMs), which augment decoder-only LLMs with audio encoders. For instance, while the Audio Flamingo series has expanded its training data substantially from version 1 to 3, the music component of training data has increased by only ≈10%, compared to much larger growth in speech and environmental sounds. Finally, the model undergoes reasoning cold-start training followed by GRPO fine-tuning to enable step-by-step reasoning. Step Audio (Huang et al., 2025) (where training data disclosures exist) show comparable imbalances. Music information retrieval and captioning.Beyond LALMs, music understanding has a long history in Music Information Retrieval (MIR), encompassing retrieval, classification, and captioning. 3 METHODOLOGY To build Music Flamingo, we first curate high-quality songs, followed by labeling them and finally fine-tuning the model on the curated data. Finally, the model is fine-tuned using reinforcement learning to enable step-by-step music reasoning. 3.1 IMPROVEDAUDIOFLAMINGO3 BASELINE Data.We first strengthen Audio Flamingo 3 to serve as the backbone for Music Flamingo. Training Pipeline.We adopt the training paradigm introduced in Audio Flamingo 3 (Goel et al., 2025) to fine-tune the model on the diverse set of speech data described above. To mitigate this gap, we designMF-Skillsand cap- ture the layered nature of music to train models for deliberate reasoning. For example, generating a caption in Figure 3 requires the model to progressively connect surface properties (tempo, key) with higher-level structures (harmony, form, production, lyrics) and then articulate them as a coherent musical narrative—a process that is non-trivial even for trained musicians. To enable this, we introduce a post-training stage beyond large-scale SFT that strengthens Music Flamingo’s reasoning abilities. We then fine-tune with MF-Think before applying GRPO with custom-designed rewards, encouraging explicit step-by-step reasoning. Prompts include constraints on length, grounding to music theory, and exemplar demonstrations.Quality Filtering.Each reasoning chain is segmented into smaller steps, which are fact-checked using our post-SFT MF (Yes/No verification against the audio). GRPO for Music reasoning and understanding.Building on the advancements in the GRPO algorithm, we adhere to the standard GRPO algorithm to train our model. To stabilize training, the sampled rewards are normalized to compute the advantages Ai as: ri−mean({r1,r2,...,rG}) std({r1,r2,...,rG}) Next, we discuss the custom reward functions we designed for GRPO training, which play a pivotal role in optimization. bridge increases harmonic rhythm/urgency.} The structured thinking reward function computes a string match for each answer in the category of the structured ground-truth metadata (e.g.Genre, Subgenre, BPM etc.) and the generated caption. Details on batch size, learning rates, and optimizers for each stage of training are in Appendix D. Without reinforcement learning fine-tuning with thinking traces, performance drops to 63.9 and 69.5 respectively, highlighting the value of step-by-step reasoning and exploration. Through improved pretraining, fine-tuning, and post-training with reinforcement learning, Music Flamingo achieves SOTA results across diverse music understanding and reasoning benchmarks. dataset sources and splits; audio preprocessing (sampling rates, normalization, chunking/segment lengths); model architectures and parameter counts; training schedules (optimizers, learning-rate policies, batch sizes, gradient clipping), GRPO/post-training settings and reward definitions; inference settings (temperature, decoding constraints); and exact evaluation protocols and metrics for every benchmark. C MUSICFLAMINGOTRAININGDATASETS Table 2 summarizes all datasets used to train Music Flamingo, including total hours, number of audio-QA pairs, and the number of epochs (passes over the dataset) used at each training stage. Table 2:List of fine pre-training and fine-tuning datasets together with their training composition. Dynamic intensity rises from the restrained verses to the full ‑ throttle choruses and solos, then gently recedes at the close. G LINEAR PROBING EXPERIMENTS WITH AUDIO ENCODERS In order to better understand the role of the audio encoder in music tasks, we performed linear probing experiments with three audio encoders: All linear probing models were trained using the average of all the frames from the audio representation in question (Qwen2Whisper, AFWhisper, or MERT) with a single linear layer. Each section adds layers, moving from intimate to expansive, then tapering back to a gentle close. it opens with an intimate solo ‑ piano introduction, add