REAL METHOD of "Graph Tokenization for Bridging Graphs and Transformers" (arXiv 2603.11099v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

One strategy modifies the architecture by incorporating attention mechanisms into Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to create specialized Graph Transformers (Yun et al., 2019). We propose a framework that addresses these challenges by integrating graph serialization with Byte Pair Encoding (BPE), a data-driven compression algorithm widely applied in text tokenization (Shi- bata et al., 1999). More re- cently, the success of sequence-native architectures such as the Transformer has renewed interest in serialization-based methods (Wang et al., 2024). In contrast, our method is reversible and almost invariant to graph permutation. It has referred to neural encoders that produce continuous embeddings (Tang et al., 2024), pooling or coarsening modules that compress subgraphs into super-nodes (Shen & P ´oczos, 2024), and vector quantization components that discretize node features or latent representations (Yang et al., 2023). We propose a data-driven graph tokenizerΦthat is learned from a training corpus of graphs rather than relying on hand-crafted heuristics. Specifically, Algorithm 1 details the training, encoding, and decoding procedures ofGraphTokenizer, and Figure 1 illustrates the overall framework. (C) A BPE vocabulary is trained on the serialized corpus, and graphs are encoded into discrete tokens for use in downstream sequence models. Local Structural Pattern Statistics.The training procedure begins with the computation of dataset-level statistics of local patterns, which provide a data-driven basis for ensuring determinism in graph serialization. Structure-Guided Reversible Serialization.We proceed to the next step of our framework, where each graph is converted into a sequence of symbols (Algorithm 1,line 5). To motivate our approach, we first review classical serialization methods against these criteria. Standard traversal algorithms likeBreadth-First Search (BFS)(Moore, 1959) andDepth-First Search (DFS)(Even & Even, 2011) also fail to meet these re- quirements. Despite this reversibility, the method remains non-deterministic because the classical Hierholzer’s algorithm (Hierholzer & Wiener, 1873) must make arbitrary choices whenever a node has multiple unvisited edges. Non-determinism in CPP, although more constrained, is intrinsic to its solution process, typically solved using Edmonds’ blossom algorithm (Edmonds & Johnson, 1973). The standard procedure first identifies all odd- degree nodes and constructs an auxiliary complete graph on them, with edge weights representing shortest path distances in the original graph. A minimum-weight perfect matching is then computed to determine which paths should be duplicated. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1TheGraphTokenizerFramework 1:ProcedureTRAIN(D, K) 2:Input:A training graph datasetD; number of BPE mergesK. 16:ProcedureENCODE(G, F,C) 17:Input:graphG; frequency mapF; the codebookC= (V T ,R). According to the dataset-level statisticsF, the C–C labeled-edge pattern has the highestF(p), sof g takes that step (step 3). the edge to Cl has the next-highestF(p)(step 5), followed by steps 7 and 9. The updated sequence is then passed back to the counting step, forming an iterative training loop. Encoding and Decoding.After training, the procedure produces two components for inference: To encode a new graph, the ENCODEprocedure in Algorithm 1 is applied. The tokens inS T are first expanded back into the original symbol sequence by applying the inverse ofR, and the inverse serialization functionf −1 then reconstructs the graph. Our method decouples the structural complexity of graphs from the architectural design of the model and enables direct use of advances in sequence modeling, such as longer context windows (Ding et al., 2022) and more efficient attention mechanisms (Dao et al., 2022) for a wide range of graph learning tasks. Implementation Details.Our proposed method,GraphTokenizer(GT), encodes graphs into token sequences that are subsequently processed by a standard Transformer model for downstream tasks. In the main results table, we report the best-performing serialization for each dataset; a comprehensive comparison across all serialization methods is pro- vided in the ablation study (Table 3) and Appendix D.3. DFS Eulerian CPP GatedGCN GraphGPS GMamba Method 0 5 10 15 20Epoch Time (s) 5.4s 8.6s 7.5s 2.1s 3.2s 2.7s 5.2s 21.0s 6.8s w/o BPE w/ BPE GNN (b) Training time per epoch. For example, a basic sulfonyl group is first established as a token, and then combined with adjacent atoms to form larger functional groups. Our approach combines reversible, structure-guided graph serialization with BPE to construct a faithful and efficient interface that encodes graphs into discrete token sequences. This perspective enables graph data to be directly integrated into general-purpose Transform- ers, allowing the graph learning field to leverage rapid advancements in model architectures, training strategies, and scaling capabilities. introduction to method- ology and encoding rules.Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 28(1):31–36, 1988. The required conver- sion of continuous attributes into a finite set of discrete symbols always needs a quantization step, which is inherently lossy. However, this is a far more manageable constraint, as BPE training is a one- time, offline cost, and its practical runtime impact is a constant-factor consideration rather than a prohibitive asymptotic scaling issue (as detailed in Appendix B.5). •Graphs with Continuous Features.To extend our framework to graphs with continuous features, a straightforward approach would be to first discretize them using methods like vector quantization (Yang et al., 2023) and then apply our pipeline. •Generative Pre-training and Cross-Domain Generalization.A key advantage of our sequence-based representation is its potential for large-scale pre-training. A natural next step is to explore pre-training on large corpora of graphs from within the same domain to enhance transferability. Since our method transforms any graph into a standard sequential format, we hypothesize that graphs from disparate domains can be treated as different ‘languages’ in NLP.This analogy extends to generative modeling: Furthermore, the sequential representation allows our method to seamlessly integrate with emerging long-context architectures to enhance scalability for massive graphs. No part of the scientific contributions—such as algorithm design, model archit