REAL METHOD of "iLLaVA: An Image is Worth Fewer Than 1/3 Input Tokens in Large Multimodal Models" (arXiv 2412.06263v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Thus, reducing vi- sual redundancy at the encoder stage not only speeds up the encoder itself but also significantly lightens the workload for the subsequent LLM. Extensive comparisons with state-of-the-art token pruning and merging techniques demonstrate the clear superiority of our method. Within these impressive models, images are usually first divided into patches and then transformed into token sequences, finally fed into a Large Language Model (LLM) and concatenated with text instructions to generate the desired textual outputs. Thus, reducing re- dundancy at the encoder stage not only accelerates the encoder itself but also yields compounded efficiency gains by substantially reducing the input load for the subsequent LLM. To enable comprehensive acceleration of LVLMs, we propose iLLaV A, which jointly optimizes the image encoder and the LLM which constitute two of the most computationally demanding compo- nents in LVLMs. First, unlike prior methods that only reduce tokens within the LLM, iLLaV A performs token reduction in both the image encoder and the LLM. These methods usually first transform the input images as patches, and then feed them into a vision-transformer-based image encoder. As the attention mechanism with computational complexityO(n 2)is both used in the image encoder and language model in LVLMs, they have to consume high computational resources and own high inference latency when faced with long input sequences. Our method is de- ployed upon the state-of-the-art Qwen2.5-VL Bai et al. (a) Visualizations for the attention scores of different layers in the image encoder. However, these methods usually require training, while our method can be done in a training-free manner. In multimodal learning, a series of methods tried to prune the tokens of intermediate layers for model acceleration. (2025b) proposes to select relevant text tokens to rate the significance of visual tokens using self-attention matrices, and then prunes visual tokens using the proposed strategy to maximize sparsity. (2025a) utilizes the attention scores between the [CLS] token and image tokens from the visual encoder to conduct token pruning. (2025) first formulates token pruning as Max-Min Diversity Problem (MMDP) and then solves the MMDP to obtain the selected subset and prunes the rest. (2024) first con- ducts token merging before the LLM to decrease the input length, and then gradually performs token pruning for the intermediate LLM layers to reduce image tokens. (2024c) are always consisted of an image encoder to encode input images, whose output features are transformed by a projector and are further combined with textual tokens as inputs into a LLM for processing. However, the massive redundancy in other network stages (e.g., image encoder) is overlooked by recent methods, which fail to fully leverage the potential of inherent feature redundancy to accelerate LVLMs. To validate the feature redundancy within the image encoder, we first visualize a raw image and four spatial attention maps from different intermediate layers of the image encoder in Fig. One can see that the encoder only pays major attention to a small part of areas in the image (the bird) and overlooks others, which demonstrates that there exists considerable visual redundancy in the image encoder. We also observe that visual redundancy spreads unevenly across different layers, as the distribution of spatial attention maps varies across different layers. It’s observed that the image encoder and the LLM dominate (>99%) the inference time in LVLMs and a large part of the inference time is consumed by the image encoder. Select tokens by attention scores Attention scores from Attention module Predefined weights Step 2: We apply token merging at the intermediate layers of both the image encoder and the language model to accelerate the forward pass. Besides, as the image encoder provides quite a large quantity of input tokens for the subsequent LLM, reducing tokens in the image encoder not only accelerates itself, but also drastically improves the computing efficiency for theLLM. 3.2 METHOD As introduced above, in this paper, we try to overcome the limitation of previous methods that only reduce tokens during or within the LLM in LVLMs, which inevitably can’t reach higher efficiency. Besides, to avoid beneficial information loss caused by token reduction operations and maintain model performance, we design a new token merging strategy to recycle potentially beneficial information from those redundant tokens. 3(b), our proposed method, termed as iLLaV A, aims to accelerate the forward pass of both image encoders and LLM to achieve high efficiency. Within the image encoder, it performs token merging between the attention module and the Feed-Forward Network of several encoder blocks to decrease visual tokens. 3.2.1 TWO-STAGE TOKEN MERGING We first introduce the token merging process in the image encoder and LLM, respectively. In the im- age encoder, we insert a token merging module after the attention module of several encoder blocks to reduce image tokens. Given an encoder block consisting of an Multi-Head Attention module 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 (MHA) and a Feed-Forward Network (FFN), the forward pass with token merging operations can be represented as: 3.1, attention scores from the attention module in the image encoder could well reveal the location of informative tokens. To form robust and information-intensive rep- resentations, we assignP c v tokens with the highest attention scores based onS avg (excludingP i v informative tokens) as recycled tokens, which are experted to serve as clusters to aggregate po- tentially beneficial information from other discarded tokens. To obtain the relationships between recycled tokensP c v and others, we compute the attention scores between them following Eq. For each recycled token, we assignM(usuallyM= 5) tokens with the highest similarity as its group members, and merge tokens within the same group by a weighted sum according to their normalized attention scores. 3.3 EFFICIENCYANALYSIS Compatibility with Flash-Attention.For the vanilla attention, we can obtain pre-calculated attention scoresS h to computeS avg. Computational Complexity.For either vanilla attention or Flash-Attention, we can obtainS avg without incurring extra computations. We allocate 40% of merged tokens to the image encoder, distributing them evenly across Layers 5, 9, and 13. The remaining 