REAL METHOD of "VINCIE: Unlocking In-context Image Editing from Video" (arXiv 2506.10941v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

By learning from videos, our method could attain universal in-context editing and generation abilities to handle various practical creation scenarios. Existing methods typically depend on task-specific pipelines and expert models (e.g., segmentation and inpainting) to curate training data. Unlike conventional image editing methods that rely on separately collected pairs of pre- and post-editing images for training, we choose not to alter the video,i.e., we train on native video data (only natural videos as the source of visual modality), but instead provide the model with detailed annotations that describe the transitions or actions occurring within the scene. Since our method eliminates the need for paired data collection and relies solely on video, it can be trivially scaled using the vast amount of video data readily available on the web. Specifically, we first sample a few coherent frames from a video scene, annotate the visual transitions, and identify Regions of Interest for editing (RoEs) using a pretrained Vision-Language Model (VLM). Next, we train a Diffusion Transformer (Peebles & Xie, 2023) with full attention as our primary implementation and additionally design a variant with block-wise causal attention, which applies bidirectional attention within each modality (frame, text, and segmentation mask) and causal attention across modalities. Scaling up the model and training data leads to substantial performance gains—for example, the success rate at the challenging 5-turn editing increases from 5% to 22% when scaling the training 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 data from 0.25M to 10M sessions—demonstrating the scalability of our approach enabled by native video data. 2 RELATEDWORK Data Construction Methods for Image Editing.Constructing image editing datasets requires first designing clear and diverse editing instructions that articulate the intended visual modifications. In this work, we propose constructing session-wise data with long, interleaved image-text context from native videos, and leverage it for pre-training or mid-training to learn the inherent consistency and transformations in abundant multimodal sequences. Each text instruction (Ti) and image (Ii) is encoded into latent tokens using a text encoder (e.g., T5) and an image encoder (e.g., V AE), respectively. noised noised noised Next Image Prediction (NIP) NIP noised Diffusion Transformer with Full Attention (initialized from a Video Foundation Model) g Diffusion Transformer with Full Attention (initialized from a Video Foundation Model) g Next Seg. Position collisions are avoided as MM-DiT employs distinct weights for each modality, and the bias terms in the linear layers effectively act as modality-specific embeddings. 3, and (2) block-wise causal attention, where causality is enforced across blocks (e.g., text or image) and bidirectional attention is applied within each block. Full attention enables comprehensive token interactions at a higher computational cost, while block-wise causal attention improves efficiency while maintaining causal structure. We model the distribution of each image (except the first) using a diffusion loss, conditioned on an interleaved context. To enhance training efficiency, we concatenate the clean and noisy tokens of each image as model inputs, and apply an attention mask to ensure that each noisy image attends only to the clean representations of preceding images, as illustrated in Fig. 1In implementation, we treat segmentation masks as RGB images, by replicating the mask across all three channels, and then encode them using the V AE encoder to obtain the latents. During training, a RoE map is included with an 80% probability for each session. The final score for each turn is computed by averaging the success rates across all samples. Given its support for multi-turn editing, high-quality manual annotations, and close alignment with real-world editing needs, we first adopt MagicBrush to evaluate our method and compare against baselines. First, our model, trained solely on interleaved video data, achieves performance comparable to SOTA methods UltraEdit and OmniGen, which rely on pairwise editing data, highlighting video data as a natural and effective source for image editing tasks. Second, with supervised fine-tuning on editing-oriented data, our method outperforms nearly all metrics, demonstrating that interleaved video data complements existing data creation approaches. In contrast, our method achieves a25%success rate at turn-5, demonstrating the advantages of our model and the use of native video data. However, our approach still falls short compared to proprietary models like GPT-4o, which benefit from significantly larger training datasets and model sizes. While the success rate at Turn-1 begins to saturate at 2.5M training samples, the success rate at later turns (e.g., Turn-4 and Turn-5) exhibits a nearly log-linear increase with more training data. Training on Native Video Data Introduces Addressable Subject Position-Shift.A key challenge when training on videos is the potential for subject position shifts across editing turns, as illustrated in the upper part of Fig.7. Us- ing the same pretrained model, training with our video sequence data increases success rates by16.4%and21.0%on Turn-1 and Turn-5, respectively, compared to training solely on specialized pairwise image editing data (Wei et al., 2024). The highest perfor- mance is achieved by first pretraining on our video sequence data, followed by supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on pairwise data, underscoring the effectiveness of our data for continual pretraining. Notably, these abilities seem to develop implicitly, as they differ from the model’s explicit training objectives: The main text and appendix together provide comprehensive descriptions of the model design, training procedure, and evaluation protocol. Self-training boosted multi-factor matching network for composed image retrieval.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 46(5):3665–3678, 2024. Interleaved Image-Text Sequence Interleaved Tokens (a) Block-wise Causal Attention (a) Block-wise Causal Attention Figure 11: Implementation of (a) block-wise causal attention and (b) full attention. Following prior work (Yu et al., 2023), we adopt the encoder in a pretrained V AE to embed each image into the latent space separately for efficient computation. We employ the pretrained Flan-T5 as the text encoder to separat