REAL METHOD of "How reinforcement learning after next-token prediction facilitates learning" (arXiv 2510.11495v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

training a large model, such as an autoregressive transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) on diverse types of data (sequences) from the web with a next-token prediction objective (Radford et al., 2019), followed by a fine-tuning stage with a reinforcement learning algorithm that seeks to improve model generations with respect to a reward function1. Accuracy plateaus around 50% (random guess) during pre-training and then immediately grows during post-training. We analyze pre-training (next- token prediction) with Stochastic Gradient Descent onD(pcot)for an autoregressive architecture that consists of a series of linear models (Malach, 2024), while for post-training, we consider the STaR algorithm (Zelikman et al., 2022) (which is a REINFORCE (Williams, 1992)-type algorithm) with a reward that verifies correctness of the whole chain-of-thought. Pre-trainingIn the first stage of training (pre-training), we train a transformer to estimate the probability of the next token on sequences drawn fromD(pcot)(Radford et al., 2019). Post-trainingAfter several steps of pre-training, we switch training algorithm and further optimize the model with reinforcement learning methods. 3.1 Pre-training vs (Pre- & Post-training) First, we fix the input dimensiond to a large value (e.g. at some iteration, we stop training with the next-token objective of (5) and resume model training with a reinforcement learning algorithm. We show results in Figure 3 for pcot=0.25, where we plot post-training accuracy as a function of RL iterations for all post-train algorithms described in Sections 2, A and for a few different values of sampling temperatureτRL. Length of generated response (sampled with temperature 1) during the course of a post-training run (GRPO with end-to-end reward) for 640 test inputs, after20k pre-training iterations.Note:The sample size n of each RL iteration differs amongst the RL algorithms:n=64 for GRPO, REINFORCE andn=3,200 sequences for STaR. Remark1.The model’s length calibration at the end of pre-training arises from the use of the logistic loss, which is a proper loss, in the next-token prediction objective. First, we observe that the STaR objective for then’th round is equivalent to next-token prediction with respect to a re-weighted versionD(qn)of the original distribution. We pre-train randomly initializedGPT2 transformers on either 4×4, 5×5 or 7×7 datasets for multiple epochs over a training set of 808k examples using the next-token prediction objective. Whenpcot=1.0 (i.e., the algorithm’s trace is included in all samples), models during pre-training quickly learn to answer correctly with long responses, leveraging the intermediate calculations present in the training data. 77 A Models and Algorithms Herein, we describe the main models and training algorithms we consider in the parity experiments. A.1 Architecture A transformer is a sequence-to-sequence neural network, which in its simplest form consists of layers of self-attention followed by a position-wise feed-forward network. 17 A.2 Pre-training The next-token prediction objective consists of the log loss of the model token distribution evaluated at output positions1to d. We omit the firstd input positions of the sequence from the loss objective, as input bits x1,...,x d are distributed uniformly at random. STaRIn STaR (Algorithm 1), we first query the pre-trained model to generate responses for inputs. GRPOGroup Relative Policy Optimization, or GRPO for short, is a policy gradient algorithm, motivated by the class of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithms (Schulman et al., 2017), that is widely used for post-training large language models with reinforcement learning. Post-trainingWe continue post-training from the last checkpoint of pre-training. We split each dataset into equal parts, perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the first half with the next-token prediction objective applied to the answer portion of the sequence, and then switch to RL on the second half. Post-trainingWe train with GRPO with a reward function that has stepwise structure: We split each dataset into equal parts8, perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the first half with the next-token prediction objective applied to the answer portion of the sequence, and then switch to RL on the second half. Post-trainingWe train with GRPO with a reward function that has stepwise structure: C Additional experimental results C.1 More experiments on main parity setting Model hyperparameters ablationWe present aggregated results for pre-training and post-training on D(pcot),p cot=0.25 for GPT2 and Mistral architectures of varying embedding dimension and number of heads in Figure 6 (depthL=2), Figure 7 (depthL=4) and Figure 8 (depthL=8). Comparison of RL algorithms for more values ofpcot In Figure 3, we presented test accuracy and response length during post-training for all RL algorithms (STaR, REINFORCE, GRPO) and for a few different values of sampling temperature used for generating training sequences forpcot=0.25. In Figure 9, we observe that all RL algorithms induce generalization for most values of sampling temperature (post-training starts after 20k pre-training iterations) whenpcot=0.1. If, instead, we consider more pre-training iterations (50k) before the start of post-training, then we observe greater probability of success with all RL algorithms for reasonable (≈1) sampling temperatures (Figure 11). 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 input dimension d 104 105 106 107 108 Gap (in sequences) Post-training Benefit (Parity, pcot={0.25}, model=gpt2, depth=4) Figure 13 Sample complexity advantage of pre- training & post-training over mere pre-training vs input dimension.Note the logarithmic scale in the y-axis. Length of generated response (sampled with temperature 1) during the course of a post-training run (GRPO with end-to-end reward) for 640 test inputs, after20k pre-training iterations.Note:The sample size n of each RL iteration differs amongst the RL algorithms:n=64 for GRPO, REINFORCE andn=3,200 sequences for STaR. Length of generated response (sampled with temperature 1) during the course of a post-training run (GRPO with end-to-end reward) for 640 test inputs, after20k pre-training iterations.Note:The sample size n of each RL iteration differs amongst the RL algorithms:n=64 for GRPO, REINFORCE andn=3,200 sequences for STaR. Length of generated response (sampled with temperature 1) during the course of a post-training run (GRPO with end-to-end reward) for 640 test in