REAL METHOD of "Towards Greater Leverage: Scaling Laws for Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Language Models" (arXiv 2507.17702v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Specifically, we define the EL of a target MoE architecture XMoE with respect to a dense baseline XDense as the ratio of their computational costs C required to achieve the same performance level (e.g.,identical loss): Consequently, for a fixed compute budget, an MoE architecture with higher EL enables larger effective parameter scaling or more comprehensive training, thereby improving efficiency. Amplifying effect of the compute budget.Crucially, the EL of a given MoE architecture is not static; it scales with the training compute budget, also following a power law. Experimental results show that when trained on the same 1T- token dataset, Ling-mini-beta achieves a lower final training loss and exhibits a slight performance advantage across a suite of downstream tasks. The total training computeCis thus a function ofMand the number of training tokensD: Metric for Quantifying MoE Compute-Efficiency Next, we define the efficiency leverage and use it to outline our objectives and roadmap. Within XMoE, models share identical core configurations (attention mechanisms, expert count, granularity, shared experts), scaled solely through hidden dimensions (dmodel, dffn, dexpert) and layer count nlayer. Definition 3.1(Efficiency Leverage).For XMoE achieving minimal loss L(Cmoe; XMoE) at compute budget Cmoe, assuming there exists a compute budget Cdense such that XDense attains comparable minimal lossL(C dense;X Dense), we define the efficiency leverage as: |L(Cmoe;X MoE)− L(Cdense;X Dense)| ≤ϵ(ϵ→0) (5) Here, the minimal loss achievable by an architecture under specific computational constraints rep- resents its performance ceiling at that scale. This allows us to simplify the EL definition in the compute-optimal training regime (Hoffmann et al., 2022) or similar over-training regime (Gadre et al., 2024). For each architecture and compute budget, we determine the reasonable model size (M) and data size (D) using our derived allocation laws and configure training with optimal hyperparameters from our hyperparameter scaling laws. 4 Scaling Laws for Efficient MoE Architecture To achieve greater leverage, we first conduct an extensive empirical study on the architectural configurations of MoE and derive scaling laws for efficient MoE architectures. 4.1 Empirical Study on the Interplay between Efficiency Leverage and MoE Architecture To identify the MoE architecture that maximizes Efficiency Leverage (EL) for a given compute budget, we systematically investigate the impact of several key design choices. To ensure robust analysis, we presuppose a standard power-law relationship between FLOPs cost and training loss, and observe the loss of experimental models after sufficient training using the theoretically optimal allocation as a reference. Figure 5Impact of the Activation Ratio A on Loss and Efficiency.(a) At any fixed compute budget (each colored line), lower activation ratios yield lower loss. By training these models and comparing their final training losses, we can identify the granularity that yields the best performance for a given FLOPs budget. For any given budget, as we increase expert granularity, the training loss first decreases and then, after reaching a minimum, begins to increase. First, for a fixed FLOPSs budget, the training loss follows a U-shaped (polynomial) relationship with respect to expert granularity, which confirms an optimal point for maximizing model performance per FLOP . Figure 6Impact of the Experts GranularityGon Loss and Efficiency.(a) IsoFLOPs curves reveal a U-shaped (polynomial) relationship between expert granularity and training loss. Figure 7Impact of the Shared Ratio S on Loss and Efficiency.(a) Loss curves demonstrate that a low, non-zero sharing ratio minimizes training loss, outperforming both no shared experts (S= 0%) and highly shared configurations.. arrangement of MoE and dense layers and compute resource allocation between attention and FFN. First, we analyze replacing the initial MoE layers with dense layers while keeping total FLOPs constant (e.g., 60-layer models with the first 1–3 layers set dense). The experimental results show that replacing the first few layers with dense layers has a minor impact on performance, with efficiency leverage close to 1 within a FLOPs budget of up to 3e20 FLOPs. 2) Broad ratio adjustments (20%–50%) minimally impact performance due to attention’s computational density, which increases knowledge density but may raise downstream inference costs Key Takeaway 4 • Introducing Dense Layers is a Valuable Design Optimization.Incorporating dense layers in the early stages of MoE has minor impact on efficiency but helps mitigate routing imbalances and reduces overall parameters. • Robustness of Compute Budget Allocation between Attention and FFNAllocating 30%-40% of FLOPs to the attention mechanism achieves optimal or near-optimal performance, with minor impact outside this range. Ling-mini-beta adopts the same GQA (Ainslie et al., 2023) attention archi- tecture as Dense-6.1B, with the only difference being the extension of the original FFN layers to MoE layers. Figure 10Dynamic of Training Loss.(a) Comparing the training processes ofLing-mini-betaand the dense model shows that the dense model converges faster in the early stages. However, whileLing-mini-betastarts slower, its training loss becomes nearly equivalent to the dense model’s after sufficient training. (b) Zooming in on the training loss for the final 100B tokens, the training loss difference betweenLing-mini-betaandDense-6.1Bis less than 0.01, demonstrating over 7x efficiency gains forLing-mini-betawith comparable performance to the dense model. We dynamically scale the number of training tokens with compute budget, ensuring that experimental models achieve a comparable and sufficient degree of training. Unlike their use of uniform hyperparameters across experiments, we optimize these settings for each compute budget, as our preliminary studies in Section 2.2 confirm that optimal configurations vary significantly with compute scale. It was conducted under a single compute budget constraint and for a specific MoE architecture. Furthermore, due to significant resource constraints, our methodology relies on the simplifying assumption that the effects of different MoE architectural factors are largely independent. (2022) introduced the Chinchilla scaling laws, highlighting the importance of balancing model size and training data volume for compute-optimal trainin