REAL METHOD of "GOT-Edit: Geometry-Aware Generic Object Tracking via Online Model Editing" (arXiv 2602.08550v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

GEOMETRY-AWAREGENERIC OBJECTTRACKING VIAONLINEMODELEDITING Shih-Fang Chen1 Jun-Cheng Chen2 I-Hong Jhuo3 Yen-Yu Lin1 1Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2Academia Sinica 3Microsoft AI ABSTRACT Human perception for effective object tracking in 2D video streams arises from the implicit use of prior 3D knowledge and semantic reasoning. In contrast, most generic object tracking (GOT) methods primarily rely on 2D features of the target and its surroundings, while neglecting 3D geometric cues, making them suscepti- ble to partial occlusion, distractors, and variations in geometry and appearance. To address this limitation, we introduce GOT-Edit, an online cross-modality model editing approach that integrates geometry-aware cues into a generic object tracker from a 2D video stream. Our approach leverages features from a pre-trained Vi- sual Geometry Grounded Transformer to infer geometric cues from only a few 2D images. By leveraging null-space con- straints during model updates, it incorporates geometric information while pre- serving semantic discrimination, yielding consistently better performance across diverse scenarios. 1 INTRODUCTION Generic object tracking (GOT) (Bhat et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Javed et al., 2022) aims to track an arbitrary user-specified target object, identified by its initially bounding box in the first frame, and to predict the locations of this target in subsequent frames. Most contemporary GOT trackers are trained on 2D datasets, e.g., (Muller et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2024). Among these, we adopt the Visual Geometry Grounded Transformer (VGGT) (Wang et al., 2025a) for its strong performance and generalization, in alignment with the GOT objectives. While 1 arXiv:2602.08550v3 [cs.CV] 24 Feb 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 DINO Geometry Model Predictor Localization Head VGGT Knowledge to be Preserved Null Space Constraint Ref Frames Cur Frame Semantic Geometry Semantic Model Predictor Predictions Ref Labels Transformer Encoder Transformer Encoder Knowledge to be Updated Feature Align and Fuse . To address this issue, we propose an online model editing technique that better integrates 3D geometric features (Wang et al., 2025a) with 2D semantic features (Oquab et al., 2023) from only 2D streaming inputs. Our approach is inspired by thenull-space model editingof AlphaEdit (Fang et al., 2025), which integrates new knowledge into a trained model while preserving existing knowledge through null-space constraints. These features are then aligned and fused to create an en- riched representation, which serves as new knowledge for online tracker adaptation. Built upon the ToMP (Mayer et al., 2022), our approach employs two model predictors: A null-space constraint is applied before combining these two sets of weights to preserve the semantic information. First, we integrate semantic and geometric knowledge into generic object tracking without relying on additional 3D input data. This integration enriches 2D tracking with geometry-aware reasoning, strengthening target discrimination in complex environ- ments. Second, we propose an online model editing method with a null-space constraint, which adaptively incorporates additional 3D geometric knowledge into GOT without degrading the dom- inant semantic features. Finally, extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks validate the effec- tiveness of our approach, demonstrating that it unlocks most of the geometric knowledge lacking in existing 2D trackers, resulting in superior performance. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2 RELATEDWORK Generic Object Tracking.Existing methods for Generic Object Tracking (GOT) task are typ- ically derived from two pipelines (Javed et al., 2022): These methods focus on training a deep network to learn a function that can distinguish and match a template of the object to a search region in the current frame. The model predictor is dynamically updated for each incoming frame by referring to previous tracking results and hence enhances the tracker’s robustness and adaptivity. To overcome this, our method integrates 2D semantic information with 3D geometric features, enabling a 2D tracker to exploit 3D geometry information through online tracking model editing. While geometric features from VGGT have proved effective for point tracking (Wang et al., 2025a; Karaev et al., 2024), our method departs from this line of work by embedding these fea- tures into a 2D GOT tracker via model editing, thereby establishing a direct connection between 3D geometric representations and object-level semantics for tracking. Finally, we provide a step-by-step description of our pipeline, highlighting our online model editing approach and objective function (Section 3.2). In the following, we first present the pipeline that fuses semantics and geometry for GOT, and then describe the model-editing mechanism that regulates their interaction and ensures coherent cooperation between semantic and geometric modalities. To ensure stability prior to SVD, we first apply whitening (Kessy et al., 2018) to the semantic features to obtain normalized featuresZand then compute the regularized correlation matrixM: Objective Function.The training objective is identical to that of previous work (Mayer et al., 2022; Bhat et al., 2019), i.e., L=λ cls Lcls (ˆp, p) +λgiou Lgiou ( ˆd, d),(14) whereˆpand ˆdare the ground-truth labels. The target classification lossL cls is a compound hinge loss as described in (Bhat et al., 2019), while the GIoU loss (Rezatofighi et al., 2019)L giou is used to supervise bounding box regression.λ cls andλ giou are scalar weights that control the contribution of each loss, and these hyperparameters are identical to those in (Mayer et al., 2022). 4 EXPERIMENTALRESULTS 4.1 EXPERIMENTALSETTING Modern trackers are trained on large-scale datasets comprising tens of millions of training samples and millions of test samples. Training Data.Like most trackers (Mayer et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2025a; 2023; Lin et al., 2024), we use the training splits of LaSOT, GOT10k, TrackingNet, and COCO for model training. Some 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 trackers (Kang et al., 2025; Liang et al., 2025) include VastTrack (Peng et al., 2024) for training; we provide a variant of our tracker trained with this new dataset. They provide training data where test classes fully overlap with training classes