REAL METHOD of "EasyTune: Efficient Step-Aware Fine-Tuning for Diffusion-Based Motion Generation" (arXiv 2602.07967v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

EFFICIENTSTEP-AWAREFINE-TUNING FORDIFFUSION-BASEDMOTIONGENERATION Xiaofeng Tan∗ Wanjiang Weng∗ Haodong Lei Hongsong Wang † Southeast University,{xiaofengtan, wjweng, hongsongwang}@seu.edu.cn ABSTRACT In recent years, motion generative models have undergone significant advancement, yet pose challenges in aligning with downstream objectives. Inspired by this insight, we proposeEasyTune, which fine-tunes diffusion at each denoising step rather than over the entire trajectory. 6) identify a key factor of the significant computational and memory overhead:the optimization is recursively related to the multi-step denoising trajectory,causing the reward value of generated motions, R(xθ), to be recursively depended on each denoised step throughout the overall trajectory. Building on this, we then theoretically analyze and empirically validate (Fig.3) the primary limitation of existing methods:coarse-grained chain optimization leads to vanishing gradients, hindering optimization of early denoising steps.To address this, we introduce a simple and effective insight:perform optimization at each denoising step, thereby decoupling gradients from the full reverse trajectory.By decoupling gradients from the denoising trajectory, ourEasyTuneframework facilitates: To overcome this, we propose aSelf-refinementPreferenceLearning (SPL), which adapts a pre-trained text-to-motion retrieval model for preference evaluation without human annotations. We dynamically construct preference pairs from the retrieval datasets and fail-retrieved results, and fine-tune this retrieval model to capture implicit preferences. We theoretically and empirically identify the cost and performance limitations of existing differentiable-reward methods, and propose EasyTune, an effective step-aware fine-tuning method. To achieve this, we introduce SPL to fine-tune a pre-trained retrieval model for preference evaluation without human-annotated preference pairs. 2, existing methods fine-tune a pre-trained motion diffusion model by maximizing the reward valueRϕ(xθ 0, c)of the motion xθ 0 generated via a T -step reverse pro- cess. Given a pre-trained motion diffusion model parameterized by ϵθ, the optimization objective is to fine-tuneθto maximize the reward valueR ϕ(xθ 0, c), with the loss defined as: each update only requires the computation graph of the current step, allowing gradients to be computed and ap- plied immediately instead of waiting until the end of the T -step reverse process.(2) Fine-grained optimization: Specifically, EasyTune employs a step-aware differentiable reward model designed to evaluate noised, rather than clean, motion data, allowing us to perform optimization at each step without storing multi-steps computation graph. 4 METHOD 4.1 EFFICIENTSTEP-AWAREFINE-TUNING FORMOTIONDIFFUSION Assuming the reward model for evaluating noisy motion, we aim to propose a step-aware fine-tuning method that reduces the excessive memory usage and performs efficient and fine-grained optimization. (1)Preference Pair Mining:retrieve motions for each text; treat the ground-truth as preferred and top incorrect retrieval as non-preferred if it’s not retrieved; (2)Preference Fine-tuning: Rϕ(x, c) =EM(x)· ET(c)·τ, (11) where EM and ET are the motion and text encoders from the pre-trained retrieval model (Weng et al., 2025), andτis a trainable temperature parameter. (12) Preference Data MiningTo identify non-preferred motions often incorrectly retrieved, we retrieve the top-kmotionsD R from the training set or subsetD T given a text conditionc: 5.4 ABLATIONSTUDY, USERSTUDY& VISUALIZATION Self-refinement Preference Learning for Reward Model Training.We evaluate SPL on text- motion retrieval, comparing it with ReAlign and state-of-the-art methods. (1) optimizing only the final 20 steps; (2) optimizing only the initial 20 steps; (3) linear increasing reweighting with wt = T−t T + 0.5 at each step; and (4) linear decreasing reweighting with wt =− T−t T + 1.5at each step. Methods Text-Motion Retrieval↑ Motion-Text Retrieval↑ R@1 R@2 R@3 R@5 R@10 R@1 R@2 R@3 R@5 R@10 TMR 67.16 81.32 86.81 91.43 95.36 67.97 81.20 86.35 91.70 95.27 +SPL 68.76 82.36 87.99 92.06 96.47 69.03 82.87 87.84 92.56 96.45 result is also comparable to that of DRaFT-50 (R@1: S5, the motion-text retrieval R@1 improves from 67.16% to 68.76%, and motion-text retrieval R@1 improves from 67.97% to 69.03%, confirming that our method generalizes effectively to weaker reward models with appropriate hyperparameter adjustments. Specifically, when retrieval fails, SPL jointly learns to memorize correct samples and forget incorrect ones; otherwise, the model simply optimizes the original pre-training objective. A larger K and a smaller retrieval pool generally increase the retrieval success rate.Intuitively, we should therefore choose K and the retrieval pool such that successful retrievals occur substantially more often than failures. 22 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Load Model & Encode PromptMemory Increase During Denoising Peak Memory Usage for Backpropagation (a) Memory Usage for Key Stages(b) Memory Growth per Denoising Step Figure S5:Comprehensive memory analysis of EasyTune and existing fine-tuning methods. It is worth noting that our method performs multiple optimization steps within a single denoising trajectory, which leads to relatively high average memory utilization. Similarly, for “A person squats down, then stands up and moves forward,” the model might misinterpret this as “A person squats down while moving forward.” Fortunately, our method combined with KL-divergence regularization (as discussed in Sec. B MORETECHNICALDISCUSSIONS B.1 GRADIENTANALYSIS OFDIFFERENTIABLEREWARDMETHODS Given a diffusion model ϵθ, we first sample a latent variable xT ∼ N(0,I). 3), i.e., tY s=1 ∂πθ(xθ s) ∂xθs →0.(S5) Thus, for large noise steps, which often determine the final generation quality (Xie & Gong, 2025), this vanishing effect implies that existing methods tend to under-optimize such steps, thereby leading to coarse or suboptimal results. B.2 DISCUSSION ONSTEPOPTIMIZATION ANDPOLICYGRADIENTMETHODS In the field of diffusion posting-training, beyond mentions differentiable-reward approaches, another major line of work is policy-gradient methods, such as GRPO (Xue et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025), PPO (Ren et al., 2024), and DDPO (Black et al., 2023). In this section, we point out that,both our approach and these policy-gradient methods truncate the gradient along th