REAL METHOD of "Agent Data Protocol" (arXiv 2510.24702v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To this end, we introduce the Agent Data Protocol (ADP), a light-weight representation language that serves as an “interlingua” be- tween agent datasets in diverse formats and unified agent training pipelines down- stream. The design of ADP is expressive enough to capture a large variety of tasks, including API/tool use, browsing, coding, software engineering, and gen- eral agentic workflows, while remaining simple to parse and train on without en- gineering at a per-dataset level. In experiments, we unified a broad collection of 13 existing agent training datasets into ADP format, and converted the standard- ized ADP data into training-ready formats for multiple agent frameworks. All code and data are re- leased publicly, in the hope that ADP could help lower the barrier to standardized, scalable, and reproducible agent training. 1 INTRODUCTION Pre-training large language models (LLMs) benefits from abundant, readily available Internet-scale data. These efforts vary in methodology, from manual curation (Rawles et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024a), to synthetic data generation (Ou et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024a), to recorded agent rollouts (Pan et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). Example conversions show how heterogeneous raw data is normalized for training agentic models. To address this gap, we introduce the Agent Data Protocol (ADP), a standardized expressive repre- sentation language for agent data. By converting heterogeneous datasets into ADP, it makes it simple to generate large-scale and diverse data for a variety of downstream training pipelines (Figure 1). As a first step to demonstrate the practical utility of ADP, we implement converters from 13 pre- existing datasets into ADP, and converters from ADP to 3 different agent architectures, demonstrat- ing its generality. Based on this, we create and release the largest publicly available dataset for agent training, consisting of 1.3M training trajectories, dubbed the ADP Dataset V1. Our experiments show training agents using ADP leads to significant performance improvements across diverse domains, including coding (SWE-Bench Verified), web browsing (WebArena), re- search (GAIA), and agentic tool use (AgentBench), as shown in § 6. We also identify significant benefits from cross-task transfer, with training on the ADP data improving significantly over training on individual datasets. We believe ADP will unlock a new wave of progress in agentic model fine-tuning by providing the standardization needed to make large-scale supervised agent training practical and scalable. 2 RELATEDWORK The development of effective LLM-based agents critically depends on high-quality training data that could capture the complexity of multi-step reasoning, tool usage, and environmental interaction 1https://pydantic.dev/ 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 (Yao et al., 2022b; Schick et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023; Masterman et al., 2024). This section reviews existing methods for agent data collection and the challenges that motivate ADP. generally includes fundamental programming tasks, such as command line code genera- tion, algorithm implementation, code completion, code translation, and code repair, etc. often consists of repository-level software engineering tasks, such as bug fixing, feature implementation, code refactoring, and dependency management, etc. 2.2 CHALLENGES ANDLIMITATIONS Despite abundant existing agent training datasets, several fundamental challenges prevent effective large-scale utilization of these resources: Creation of high-quality agent training data requires significant resources and expertise (Paullada et al., 2021; Bhardwaj et al., 2024; Zha et al., 2025). Manual curation is expensive and requires domain knowledge; synthetic generation faces challenges in verifying data quality; recorded agent rollouts are fundamentally constrained by the capabilities of existing baseline agents, limiting the diversity and complexity of trajectories. Existing agent training datasets each employ its own represen- tation format, action spaces, and observation structures (Ning et al., 2025; Luo et al., 2025). 3 THEAGENTDATAPROTOCOL To overcome these challenges and limitations, and to make good use of existing data resources, we propose the Agent Data Protocol (ADP). ADP establishes a unified schema that bridges the gap between existing heterogeneous agent training datasets and large-scale supervised agent fine-tuning. 3.1 DESIGNPRINCIPLES We design ADP around the following core principles: ADP is designed to provide a unified representation that unifies existing agent training datasets of various different formats to a standardized format, addressing the challenge of heterogeneous dataset formats. ADP is designed to ensure that complex agentic trajectories could be accurately expressed with no loss of critical information. By addressing the fundamental challenges in utilization agent data, ADP aims to push the progress in agent training, making large-scale agent SFT more accessible to the broader research community. 3.2 ARCHITECTURE The ADP schema is implemented as Pydantic schemas, and is simple yet expressive in design. This unified representation enables researchers to combine datasets that were previously incompati- ble, facilitating large-scale training across diverse domains. 3.3 CONVERSIONPIPELINE As shown in Figure 1, we implemented a three-stage conversion pipeline with ADP that transforms heterogeneous datasets into training-ready agentic formats. Each dataset is extracted in its raw format, and then converted to the ADP schema by mapping each dataset-specific actions and observations to the ADP’s standardized action and observation space. This stage converts ADP standardized trajectories into supervised fine- tuning (SFT) format suitable for training language models. Rather than train- ing only one generic action model, we recognize that effective agent training requires adaptation to each framework’s specific scaffolding and interactions formats. 5 EXPERIMENTALSETUP 5.1 TRAININGSETUP To evaluate ADP’s effectiveness in training across diverse data sources, we utilize a comprehensive collection of 13 agent training datasets, spanning coding, SWE, API/tool user, and browsing, as 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 documented in Table 1. These datasets represent a broad spectrum of heterogeneity challenges that ADP addresses, including varied data creation methodologies (synthetic generation, manual curati