REAL METHOD of "An Empirical Study of Attention and Diversity for Adaptive Visual Token Pruning in Large Vision-Language Models" (arXiv 2603.01236v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

While prior works primarily focus on either attention- based or diversity-based pruning methods, in-depth analysis of these approaches’ characteristics and limitations remains largely unexplored. (1) Our erank-based quantitative analysis shows that many diversity-oriented pruning methods preserve substantially less fea- ture diversity than intended; moreover, analysis using the CHAIR dataset re- veals that the diversity they do retain is closely tied to increased hallucina- tion frequency compared to attention-based pruning. (2) We further observe that attention-based approaches are more effective on simple images where visual evidence is concentrated, while diversity-based methods better handle complex images with distributed features. The first is attention-based methods (Zhang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025; Arif et al., 2025), which consider tokens with high attention scores as important information and remove the rest. Attention-based methods prioritize the preservation of highly weighted tokens, which can result in concentrated but sometimes repetitive selections. The method explores tokens in descending attention order and removes redundant tokens based on similarity, using an adaptively set threshold informed by image-level complexity. • We provide the first erank-based characterization of how existing pruning methods preserve feature diversity and how this retained diversity relates to hallucination behavior. A typical LVLM architecture comprises a vision encoder (Radford et al., 2021; Tschannen et al., 2025), a modality projector, and an LLM. Based on the observation that image information in the vision encoder tends to concentrate on a small set of key tokens, these methods utilize attention scores from the output layer to select a limited number of tokens that aggregate global information. However, they tend to retain similar tokens concentrated in specific regions, which results in insuf- ficient diversity to fully represent the entire token set.(ii) Diversity-based method:These methods leverage inter-token similarity to enhance the diversity of the selected token set (Alvar et al., 2025), thereby encouraging the selection of more diverse tokens. Among existing methods, we focus on two categories:(i) attention-based, which select tokens according to [CLS] token atten- tion scores, and(ii) diversity-based, which aim to reduce redundancy and preserve feature diversity. Attention concentration via attention entropy.To assess the concentration of attention within the vision encoder, we compute the Shannon entropy of the class token’s attention score. Given the head- averaged attention scoreα∈R N obtained from the penultimate layer, we exclude the self-attention score of the class token and renormalize the remaining score into a valid probability distribution: pi = αiP j̸=CLS αj , X i pi = 1.(1) The entropy is then computed as H(p) =− X i pi logp i.(2) The entropy valueH(p)quantifies how attention is distributed across tokens: Given a token embedding matrixA∈R N×d l, we first obtain its singular values{σ i}via singular value decomposition (SVD). Relative Strengths of Diversity Mechanisms Across MethodsA closer examination of these methods clarifies this pattern. VisPruner removes feature-redundant tokens before applying attention filtering, providing a more direct form of diversity preservation and resulting in slightly higher erank among the attention-driven approaches. Nevertheless, all three remain fundamentally constrained by their reliance on attention-guided token selection, which in- herently limits the semantic diversity they can retain compared to a method like DivPrune, whose primary objective is to maximize geometric dispersion. In this section, we compare and analyze the characteristics of attention score–based and diversity-based methods from the perspective of hallucination, aiming to identify how the two prun- ing methods differ in inducing hallucinations. MethodC s ↓C i ↓Recall↑Len LLaV A-1.5-7B51.0 13.9 78.7 101.4 Attention-based methods FasterVLM (arXiv’24) 45.4 13.5 69.3 94.0 PruMerge+ (ICCV’25) 45.2 15.6 66.7 91.4 Vispruner (ICCV’25) 49.8 15.0 72.6 96.7 Diversity-based methods DivPrune (CVPR’25) 57.4 18.0 76.4 101.1 FPSPruner† 58.6 18.6 76.0 100.5 Table 2:Comparison on CHAIR. Results on the CHAIR dataset.Table 2 presents the results of the attention-based and diversity-based methods on the CHAIR dataset. Despite small dif- ferences in Len, the diversity-based methods exhibit higher values of the hallucination metricsC S and CI compared to the attention-based methods, sug- gesting that selecting diverse tokens with low fea- ture similarity may increase the likelihood of hal- lucination. In contrast, the diversity-based methods achieve higher recall, indicating that they are able to capture a larger number of objects than the attention- based ones. Comparison of the two methods in terms of response patterns.The two methods also differ in their response patterns. attention in pruning across datasets and image complexities.(a) High- erank methods perform better on complex datasets (POPE), while low-erank methods excel on sim- ple datasets (ScienceQA). (b) Simple images show low entropy and erank, leading to concentrated attention suitable for attention-based pruning. In contrast, the attention-based method FasterVLM focuses on the main objects and provides more conservative and reliable expla- nations, thereby suppressing hallucinations that frequently appear in diversity-based outputs. Effect of attention-based selection on object hallucination.Based on the ob- servation that attention-based token selec- tion tends to reduce hallucination, we con- ducted experiments to quantitatively as- sess the effect of attention-based selection on hallucination by varying the balance between diversity-based and attention- based selection. As a result, diversity-based methods outperformed in high erank tasks, while attention-based methods were superior in low erank tasks. Whereas hybrid methods such as VisPruner (Zhang et al., 2025a) and BAT (Long et al., 2023) use fixed mixing ratios, our approach maps erank to a linear weighting function, assigning a larger proportion of attention-based tokens for low-erank (simple) images and a larger proportion of diversity-based to- 7 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 ... Furthermore, as shown in Table 6, we also applied the same adaptive rule to a pairwise combination of a purely attention-based method and a purely 