REAL METHOD of "AutoCode: LLMs as Problem Setters for Competitive Programming" (arXiv 2510.12803v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

set constraints, input distributions, and edge cases that rule out shortcuts; target specific algorithms (e.g., max- flow, dynamic programming, data structures); and calibrate complexity beyond the reach of most competitors. We introduce AutoCode, which uses multiple rounds of validation to yield competition-grade problem statements and test cases. On held-out problems, AutoCode test suites approach 99% consistency with official judgments, a significant improvement over current state-of-the-art methods like HardTests, which achieve less than 81%. First, problem setting for competitive coding requires a deeper understanding of algorithms that problem solving may not. Competitive programming problems have a strict bar designed to assess a deeper understanding of the underlying algorithm design principles, data structures, and complexity trade-offs. As such, problem setting encompasses all the challenges of solving a problem, and then more. For instance, a greedy algorithm with poor time complexity might pass a suite of small, random tests, only to fail against adversarially constructed cases designed to expose its flaws. To address these critical gaps, we introduce AutoCode, a systematic framework that employs LLMs in a closed-loop, multi-role system to automate the entire lifecycle of competitive program- ming problem creation and evaluation. Our first contribution is an enhanced Validator-Generator- Checker framework that achieves state-of-the-art reliability in test case generation, where the Generator generates test cases, the Validator validates whether the generated test cases satisfy the problem constraints, and the Checker checks whether a solution is correct given the test cases. Building on this highly reliable verification pipeline, we introduce our second major contribution: • State-of-the-Art Test Cases Generation for Existing Problems.Our testcase generation frame- work achieves over 91% consistency with official judgments on a large-scale benchmark of 7538 problems, significantly outperforming existing methods whose consistency ranges from 72 – 81%. Second, to strengthen verdict reliability, EvalPlus [17] augments unit tests, and TACO [3], CodeCon- tests+ [2], HardTests [4], TestCase-Eval [18], LogiCase [19] and the meta-benchmark TCGBench [20] propose rule or LLM-driven generators emphasizing constraint validity, edge-case coverage, and adversariality. brute force) to generate and certify new problems, addressing both static-benchmark contamination and under-constrained tests within a single framework. Its function is to ensure any given input strictly adheres to all constraints specified in the problem description. Because one of our prominent goals is to serve as a high-quality verifier for RLVR, we pay particular attention to reducing the FPR. Validator Algorithm 1:BUILDVALIDATOR Input:Problem specS Output:Selected ValidatorV ⋆ 1E ←LLM.GENERATEEVALCASES(S;N=40, 10 valid, 30 near-valid) 2{V 1,V2,V3} ←LLM.EMITVALIDATORS(S,K=3) 3forVin{V 1,V2,V3}: 4score(V)← ∑(x,label)∈E [V(x)=label] 5V ⋆ ←arg max V∈{V1,V2,V3} score(V) 6returnV ⋆ The foundation of our framework is a highly robust Validator, responsible for rejecting any input that violates the problem’s explicit constraints. To construct it, we first guide the LLM to generate a targeted suite of 40 test cases. These carefully crafted and validated edge cases are designed to rigorously probe the Validator’s robustness against subtle constraint violations. With this evaluation set established, we then prompt the LLM to produce three distinct candidate Validator programs. Generator Algorithm 2:BUILDGENERATORSUITE Input:S, ValidatorV ⋆ Output:Final test setT 1G 1 ←EXHAUSTIVESMALL(S)# small-scale enumeration coverage 2G 2 ←RANDOMEXTREME(S)# random + extreme: • Small Data Exhaustion.For problems with small constraints or those featuring multiple test points, as are common on platforms like Codeforces and AtCoder, we generate inputs that exhaustively explore all permutations and combinations of small-scale data. Drawing from contest experience, we also adversarially design hack cases, such as those intended to make common greedy algorithms fail or to induce hash collisions. • TLE-Inducing Data.To specifically address the common issue of solutions with incorrect time complexity passing on weak test cases, we construct inputs with specific structures designed to maximize the computational load for certain algorithms. To ensure that the Checker achieves a similar accuracy as the Validator, we adopt a construction method analogous to that used for the Validator. First, we prompt the LLM to generate 40 distinct test cases. Each test case consists of a valid input, an output that appears reasonable but might contain mistakes, the correct output provided by the reference solution, and the expected verdict (e.g., Accepted or Wrong Answer). We evaluate each candidate Checker against these 5 AutoCode Algorithm 3:BUILDCHECKER Input:S, reference solutionR, ValidatorV ⋆ Output:Selected CheckerC ⋆ 1Q ←LLM.GENERATECHECKERSCENARIOS(S,R;N=40) 2foreachq∈ Qdo 3ifV ⋆(q.input)̸=valid: Interactor Algorithm 4:BUILDINTERACTOR Input:S, reference solutionR, ValidatorV ⋆ Output:Selected InteractorI ⋆ 1M ←LLM.MUTATE(R; small logical edits:<>/≤ /≥swap, off-by-one, missing checks, wrong tie-breaks, RNG misuse, etc.) 2{I 1,I 2,I 3} ←LLM.EMITINTERACTORS(S,K=3) 3forIin{I 1,I 2,I 3}: prioritize passing the true solution, then maximize discrimination 7I ⋆ ←arg max I score(I) 8returnI ⋆ Our framework introduces a novel, fully automated approach for generating test data for interactive problems, a previously unaddressed challenge (e.g., in CodeContests+ [2]). Method Consistency (%) (↑) FPR (%) (↓) FNR (%) (↓) CodeContests [21] 72.9±0.2 7.7±0.2 46.3±0.3 CodeContests+ [2] 79.9±0.2 8.6±0.2 31.6±0.3 TACO [3] 80.7±0.2 11.5±0.2 26.9±0.3 HardTests [4] 81.0±0.2 12.1±0.2 25.8±0.3 AutoCode (Ours)91.1±0.1 3.7±0.1 14.1±0.2 Table 2: For each problem, the evaluation uses 33 submissions generated by different LLMs, 25% of which are accepted. The primary benchmark consists of 7538 problems derived from the intersection of well-known existing datasets: We are unable to evaluate prior methods on this newer benchmark as their data generation codebases are not publicly available. This marks a significant leap over existing methods which don’t surpass 81.0%. This result validates our method’s effectiveness on modern, difficult problems where prior methods could not be evaluated