REAL METHOD of "ProfBench: Multi-Domain Rubrics requiring Professional Knowledge to Answer and Judge" (arXiv 2510.18941v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

MULTI-DOMAINRUBRICS REQUIRING PROFESSIONALKNOWLEDGE TOANSWER ANDJUDGE Zhilin Wang, Jaehun Jung, Ximing Lu, Shizhe Diao, Ellie Evans, Jiaqi Zeng, Pavlo Molchanov, Y ejin Choi, Jan Kautz, Yi Dong NVIDIA {zhilinw, yidong}@nvidia.com ABSTRACT Evaluating progress in large language models (LLMs) is often constrained by the challenge of verifying responses, limiting assessments to tasks like mathematics, programming, and short-form question-answering. The ease of verification should not limit the type of tasks we can train models to successfully complete. To support the community with robust rubrics for real-world, professional-level tasks, we propose ProfBench—a rubric-guided benchmark for professional-grade LLMs, curated by expert human pro- fessionals. Extraction accounts for 34.1%, emphasizing accurate retrieval of information (w/o meaningful subcategories). We introduce ProfBench, the first benchmark with expert-created rubrics across multiple pro- fessional domains including over 7000 response-criterion pairs involving Scientific Research and Business tasks. We propose methods to reduce the bias of LLM-Judges in favoring responses from specific providers as well as the cost of running the benchmark, in order to improve its accessibility. Rubric CreationFor each task, we ask annotators to create around 15 to 60 criteria used to score the response of models. In addition, annotators are asked to assign an importance and one or more criteria types. The reviewer then provides overall feedback on the set of criteria as well as recommendation to keep or improve each criterion (details in §I). 4 BENCHMARKINGMODELS ASLLM-JUDGES Task FormulationFor each criterion, we provide the LLM-Judge the response, the criterion and ask whether it fulfills the criterion in a binary fashion. We formulate a bias- index by first calculating the bias for each model using 1 N PN i=1 cmodel i −c human i where N is total number of criteria and ci is the criterion-fulfillment predicted by model or labeled by human. Then, we calculate the min and max bias across three models (o3, Grok4 and R1-0528) before calculating the bias-index by taking the difference between max-bias minus the min-bias. CostWe calculate the upper-bound cost of running the full LLM-Judge evaluation, using the number of input and output tokens multiplied by their public cost (OpenRouter, 2025), excluding discounts due to caching and other methods. Such accessibility allows more researchers from a wider background to iterate with methods to train rubric-following behavior. However, the jump from llama-3.1-70B to 3.3-70B (+3.4%) was much larger than the jump from llama-3.1-70B to llama-3.1-405B (+0.9%), indicating the importance of improvements in post-training recipe beyond model size alone. These criteria could be harder to judge without extending thinking, since they often entail multi-step reasoning to ensure that the response fulfills the criteria, instead of a simple answer-matching. 5 BENCHMARKINGMODELS ASREPORT-GENERATORS Task FormulationWe formalize the task as given a prompt alongside grounding documents, generate a response that addresses the task prompt. This might be a result of open-weight models having more in-domain training data and potentially over-emphasizing benchmarks relating to Code (e.g. On the other hand, much less attention has been placed on measuring and improving model performance in Chemistry, Consulting and Finance. This suggests that improvement in ProfBench necessitates not only model scaling, but possibly further innovations in training techniques and data curation. However, when inferring with separate models of identical size trained for instruction following and thinking respectively, thinking does not necessarily confer an advantage. To address this, we first observe that the performance variance differs significantly across the 40 task evaluated (Fig. For formal description of the problem and comparison 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Optimal Samples for each Task ID Score Distribution for each Task ID Figure 3: To understand the effect of web search and the grounding documents in each task, we conduct two ablations—(1) prompting without the documents, and (2) prompting without the documents but allowing the models to retrieve relevant documents through web search (as all documents have publicly accessible urls). However, the large amount of input tokens (0.12 to 0.24 million per task, or 4 to 12x as much as the original grounding documents) suggests that a large quantity of document tokens might be included in prompt context, highlighting retrieval precision as a potential area for improvement. 7 CONCLUSION We present ProfBench, the first benchmark with expert-curated rubrics across diverse professional domains including Physics PhD, Chemistry PhD, Finance MBA and Consulting MBA. REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT Procedures for data collection has been extensively documented in §3, C and D. A simulation framework for methods that learn from human feedback, 2023. Cunningham, Vladimir Goryachev, Demosthenes Patramanis, Michael Krause, Andrew Redenti, David Aldous, Jesyin Lai, Shannon Coleman, Jiangnan Xu, Sangwon Lee, Ilias Magoulas, Sandy Zhao, Ning Tang, Michael K. Nunes, Jeremiah Milbauer, M Saiful Bari, Zihao Wang, Behzad Ansarinejad, Yewen Sun, Stephane Durand, Hossam Elgnainy, Guillaume Douville, Daniel Tordera, George Balabanian, Hew Wolff, Lynna Kvistad, Hsiaoyun Milliron, Ahmad Sakor, Murat Eron, Andrew Favre D. McAlister, Alejandro Jos ´e Moyano, Alexey Pronin, Jing Fan, Angel Ramirez-Trinidad, Yana Malysheva, Daphiny Pottmaier, Omid Taheri, Stanley Stepanic, Samuel Perry, Luke Askew, Ra´ul Adri´an Huerta Rodr´ıguez, Ali M. Using the chiral PQ charge difference (XL −X R) as the weight for each Weyl fermion, compute the ratio E/N (electromagnetic to color anomaly coefficients) and give your answer in lowest-term fractional form. (i) British English, (ii) No tables, (iii) Every HKD figure must be prefixed HK$, (iv) Show intermediate steps when calculating quantitative answers rather than outputting formulas, and (v) Round HKD only at the end of each sub-task (i.e., do not round figures for intermediate calculations, unless explicitly stated). If length is missing, write ”Cannot compute (no per-hour figure)”. - As a first step, calculate paid seats assuming they are equal to 85% of capacity; the remaining 15% will be free to offer scholarships and incentives to drive demand. Compute Net Tui