REAL METHOD of "Cultivating Pluralism In Algorithmic Monoculture: The Community Alignment Dataset" (arXiv 2507.09650v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

2.Algorithmic monoculture hinders pluralistic alignment.We show that popular alignment methods (prompt-steering, SFT, DPO, GRPO) cannot learn common human preferences (as identified in our hu- man study) from standard temperature- and model-sampled preference datasets due to the underlying homogeneity of candidate responses. 2 An algorithmic monoculture of language model responses relative to the pluralism of human preferences In the following, we focus on the first key result: 3 Algorithmic monoculture hinders pluralistic alignment efforts, but negatively correlated sampling offers a solution Next, we examine the impact of algorithmic monoculture on efforts for pluralistic alignment. Intuitively, if someone is only given a choice between an apple and a banana, but what they really want is amamey, then their true preference will not be measured. In contrast, we show that if the candidate sets were instead generated with NC sampling, then all tested methods exhibit Pareto improvements in their ability to learn any of the four IW values. Experimental set-up.We test the performance of four different preference learning algorithms in learning preferences for each of the four Inglehart-Welzel values (secular-rational, traditional, self-expression, and survival values) under three different variants of the PRISM dataset 6. (1)prompt steering, using 10 training prompts and their chosen response as in-context learning examples, (2)supervised fine-tuning (SFT)on the chosen responses, (3),direct preference optimization (DPO)[Rafailov et al., 2023] on pairs of chosen and rejected responses, (4) 6We only consider the first turn of the conversations in the PRISM dataset. Preference data was collected for 2-4 turns where, for each turn after the first, the prompt was always supplied by the annotator. Multiple steps were taken to confirm quality, including a training phase for all participants, attention tests, and human audits of annotator-provided free-form explanations of choices. 10 This choice was based upon our insights from Sections 2 and 3 that (i) default language model responses exhibit algorithmic monoculture, (ii) this limits the ability of alignment methods to learn common humam preferences when using stan- dard temperature-sampled candidates, and (iii) using NC sampling to generate candidate sets improves downstream learnability of diverse human preferences. Algorithmic monoculture.We find that all 21 LLMs tested exhibit analgorithmic monoculture[Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021, Bommasani et al., 2022, Wu et al., 2024, Kim et al., 2025] and produce responses that are only aligned with the same 41% of human preferences (Section 2). We employ the term algorithmic monoculture in a broad sense—not implying that multiple decision-makers rely on the exact same algorithm [Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021], but rather that many LLMs yield the same outcomes [Bommasani et al., 2022]. Concretely, if GPT-4o outputs “The answer is 2” as its generation and “1” does not appear within the top five tokens conditioned on “The answer is ” , then the resulting probability assigned to label 2 is 1.0, and the resulting probability assigned to label one is 0.0. In the first turn, responses in the PRISM dataset were independently sampled at a temperature of one from 21 different LLMs, while in subsequent turns, candidates are generated by temperature-sampling from the model that was preferred in the first turn. To select the chosen response within the set of four responses, we compute a score for each response by summing all of its pairwise scores (each of which is either 0.0, 1.0, or 0.5). Namely, for each example in the test set, we randomly choose 10 examples from the train set and present the prompt and chosen response as ICL examples in the system prompt. We choose the best checkpoint per epoch based on validation loss (which is the first epoch for all runs). We choose the best checkpoint per epoch based on validation loss, generally the first epoch. For the 70B model, we use four nodes with eight devices each, with training batch size of 2 with 35 two gradient accumulation steps and validation batch size of eight. 1:forouter iterationdo 2:collect rollouts with generation processes 3:evaluate the judge as the reward function on the rollouts 4:compute the advantages (relative performance) on the rollouts 5:forinner iterationdo 6:sample a batch from the rollouts 7:apply the policy update to the batch 8:end for 9:end for We use Open Instruct’s GRPO implementation [Lambert et al., 2024]. For each prompt, we sample four responses from the policy model to compute the sample mean and a standard deviation for the reward. the learning rate is 5e-7 , the policy loss clipping threshold of the likelihood ratio is 0.2, and the sampling and training temperature is 1.0. This issue is not as significant in the SFT and DPO models as their training objectives only re-weight known responses rather than searching over the response space. For each use case, we first generated a set of candidate prompts from Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct, using the following prompt: To confirm data quality, we implemented stringent standards such a conducting a training portion and utilizing attention tests in close collaboration with the vendor. Training Phase.In the training phase, all annotators were required to complete ten annotation tasks (each multi-turn) with the same structure to the tasks completed during the production phase. Attention tests:In the training phase, 9 .4% of the tasks provided to annotator’s were attention tests. An attention test consists of only a single response that is relevant to the initial prompt; for example, a prompt might request an essay for a high school science project, but only one response is actually an essay while the others are about booking a Mediterranean cruise, a recipe, and a joke. In addition, we did not allow an overall queue to move from the training phase to the main data collection phase until at least 85% of the total attention tests in the queue were successfully passed. We then trained internal auditors as well as the vendor management team to review these justifications and rank them as high, medium or low quality. We then conducted similar audit to the training phase and removed any annotators who demonstrated continuous low-quality feedback (2+ annotations) or active adversarial behavior including copy/pasting feedback and suspected use of AI tools to write annotation responses. (a) we ran 