REAL METHOD of "RAP: 3D Rasterization Augmented End-to-End Planning" (arXiv 2510.04333v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

3D RASTERIZATIONAUGMENTEDEND-TO-END PLANNING Lan Feng1,† Yang Gao1,† ´Eloi Zablocki2,‡ Quanyi Li Wuyang Li 1,† Sichao Liu1,† Matthieu Cord2,3,‡ Alexandre Alahi1,† 1EPFL, Switzerland 2Valeo.ai, France 3Sorbonne Universit´e, France †firstname.lastname@epfl.ch ‡firstname.lastname@valeo.com ABSTRACT Imitation learning for end-to-end driving trains policies only on expert demonstra- tions. Prior work explores photorealistic digital twins via neural render- ing or game engines, but these methods are prohibitively slow and costly, and thus mainly used for evaluation. In this work, we argue that photorealism is unnecessary for training end-to-end planners. Motivated by this, we propose3D Rasterization, which replaces costly ren- dering with lightweight rasterization of annotated primitives, enabling augmen- tations such as counterfactual recovery maneuvers and cross-agent view synthe- sis. To transfer these synthetic views effectively to real-world deployment, we introduce aRaster-to-Realfeature-space alignment that bridges the sim-to-real gap in the feature space. Our results show that lightweight rasterization with feature alignment suffices to scale E2E train- ing, offering a practical alternative to photorealistic rendering. Most existing methods rely on offline imitation learning (IL), where poli- cies are trained only on expert demonstrations from large-scale logs. While effective in open-loop evaluations, such training suffers from covariate shift (Ross et al., 2011) and provides few recovery examples. A natural solution is to augment training with synthetic scenarios. These pipelines enable counterfactual augmentation and closed-loop training by synthesizing inputs beyond the logged trajectory. However, despite their visual fidelity, they remain prohibitively slow and costly, making large-scale training impractical. Neural or engine-based methods(left) aim to minimize the sim-to-real gap inpixel space, but incur high computational cost. In contrast,our approach(right) leverages3D rasterization, which is scalable and fully controllable, and aligns rasterized inputs with real images infeature space. robust E2E driving training does not require photorealistic rendering, but rather semantic accuracy and scalability. To this end, we introduce a3D rasterization pipelinethat reconstructs driving scenes by projecting annotated primitives (such as lane polylines and agent cuboids) into perspective views (Figure 1, right). Unlike neural/engine rendering, rasterization is training-free, fast, and highly controllable, while still capturing the semantic and dynamic cues necessary for driving. Moreover, in contrast to neural rendering, which seeks to minimize the gap in pixel space, we propose aRaster-to-Real (R2R) alignmentmodule that minimizes the gap in feature space, where semantic and geometric structures are more compact and easier to align. • ARaster-to-Real (R2R) alignmentmodule that bridges rasterized and real inputs in feature space, through a combination of distillation and adversarial adaptation. paired real and rasterized inputs are processed by a frozen image encoder and a learnable feature projector. Spatial-level alignment uses MSE loss against detached raster features, while global-level alignment employs a gradient reversal layer and domain classifier to enforce domain confusion. Attempts at training planners with these renderings, e.g., RAD (Gao et al., 2025), remain small-scale and photorealism-focused. 3 3D RASTERIZATIONAUGMENTEDPLANNING RAP builds on real-world driving logs by generating additional training data that goes beyond expert demonstrations. To this end, we design a lightweight rasteriza- tion pipeline that reconstructs controllable views of traffic scenes (Section 3.1), enabling fast and 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Figure 3:Real vs. large-scale data augmentation (Section 3.2), and we further introduce a feature-alignment module to ensure the network can effectively transfer from rasterized inputs to real images (Section 3.3). As shown in Figure 4, features extracted by a frozen DINOv3 encoder and visualized via PCA remain qualitatively consistent between rasterized and real images, indicat- ing that abstraction preserves perceptual cues crucial for downstream learning. 3.2 DATAAUGMENTATIONS VIA3D RASTERIZATION Beyond rendering ego-centric views, our rasterization pipeline naturally supports diverse non-trivial augmentation strategies, allowing us to expand the training corpus and expose the planner to richer and rarer distributions of driving scenarios. Spatial-level alignment.For each real samplex r with a paired rasterized renderingx s, we use a visual encoderϕ(·)to extract projected features: For each sample, we compute a global representationg∈R d′ by average pooling its feature map F∈R N×d ′ . We then train a domain classifierDto predict whethergcomes from real or rasterized data. Following Ganin & Lempitsky (2015), a gradient reversal layer is inserted beforeD, such that the encoder is optimized to maximize domain confusion whileDis optimized to minimize classification error withy∈ {0,1}the domain label: Lglobal =−E (g,y)  ylogD(g) + (1−y) log(1−D(g))  .(3) Overall objective.The final training objective combines task supervision with both levels of R2R alignment withL task the total planning loss (Guo et al., 2025):L=L task +λ s Lspatial +λ g Lglobal, whereλ s, λg control the strength of spatial-level and global alignment. Training.We train on the curated dataset with two supervision heads: 4.2 ABLATIONSTUDY Unless otherwise specified, all ablations are conducted on thenavtrainsubset of NA VSIM. The training set consists of85kpaired samples with both real and rasterized views, along with an ad- ditional100kraster-only samples generated from ego trajectories. thenavtrainsplit with85kreal samples, and the same split aug- mented with8.5kperturbed ego trajectories. Ablation on R2R Alignment.We evaluate R2R alignment on thenavtrainsubset of NA VSIM, which provides85kreal–raster paired samples. Starting from thenavtrainsplit with85kreal samples, we progressively add{1k, 10k, 100k, 500k, 1000k}synthetic samples of other vehicles while keeping all other factors fixed. Our research focuses on developing scalable training methods for end-to-end autonomous driving planners using synthetic rasterized data. The paper provides detailed descrip- tions of the model architecture (Section 3), training setup (Section 4), and ablation studies (Sec- tio