REAL METHOD of "Continuous Space-Time Video Super-Resolution with 3D Fourier Fields" (arXiv 2509.26325v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 CONTINUOUSSPACE-TIMEVIDEOSUPER- RESOLUTION WITH3D FOURIERFIELDS Alexander Becker Julius Erbach Dominik Narnhofer Konrad Schindler ETH Zurich ABSTRACT We introduce a novel formulation for continuous space-time video super- resolution. Instead of decoupling the representation of a video sequence into separate spatial and temporal components and relying on brittle, explicit frame warping for motion compensation, we encode video as a continuous, spatio- temporally coherent 3D Video Fourier Field (VFF). The coefficients of the proposed, Fourier-like sinusoidal basis are predicted with a neural encoder with a large spatio-temporal receptive field, conditioned on the low-resolution input video. VSR is an elementary capability for video editing and analysis, because the spatial resolution and frame rate of video recordings are limited by hardware and power constraints. An important capability for an arbitrary-scale super-resolution method is correctanti-aliasing: I.e., we sidestep the above-mentioned problems byjointlyembedding the space and time dimensions in a single, unified representation. Our VFF representation – to our knowledge, the first such model for video super-resolution – is conceptually simple and interpretable, and at the same time a natural choice if one aims to decode the video at arbitrary spatial and temporal scales: Like previous methods, VFF can be queried at any desired, continuous spatio-temporal coordinate – but at much lower computational cost. The resulting, end-to-end trainable continuous space-time video super-resolution (C-STVSR) method, which we name V 3, outperforms existing baselines by a substantial margin across different tasks and datasets, while being computationally more efficient (Fig. • V 3, an end-to-end framework to predict the parameters of VFF directly from a low-quality input video, using a backbone encoder with large spatio-temporal receptive field. first apply a video frame interpolation method such as SuperSloMo (Jiang et al., 2018) or DAIN (Bao et al., 2019), then follow up with a single-image or video SR model such as RCAN (Zhang et al., 2018) or EDVR (Wang et al., 2019). To avoid it, one-stage STVSR methods such as Zooming Slow-Mo (Xiang et al., 2020) and TMNet (Xu et al., 2021) perform spatial and temporal upsampling jointly. These methods generally assumefixed, integer upscaling factors, limiting their usability. Chen et al., 2021) to enable sampling at arbitrary resolutions without retraining. Hence, dedicated methods have been proposed forarbitrary-scale video SR(A VSR), which incorporate temporal guidance features (Li et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2024). Furthermore, none of the mentioned methods has a principled mechanism for anti-aliasing. no existing method provides a unified, spatio-temporally consistent representation that would (i) keep the system design simple; (ii) circumvent explicit, error-prone warping; (iii) allow for multi-frame motion context; and (iv) include an efficient mechanism for the elementary anti-aliasing operation. 3 METHOD To describe our formulation for continuous space-time video super-resolution we first define the problem setup, then introduce our VFF video representation and its conditional parameterization, and finally show how to embed it in an end-to-end learning framework. The objective of C-STVSR is to recover a continuous spatio-temporal signal, ˆV(x, y, t) :R2 ×[0, T]→R 3 .(1) The observed video satisfiesV lr =D( ˆV), whereDdescribes the degradation – in the case of C- STVSR the discrete sampling of the signal in space and time. 4) Video Fourier Field (continuous) Sampled output video rT Local region phase shift & scale= = sum sW sH W H T H W É Figure 2:Overview of V 3.A backbone encoder predicts a voxel grid of local phase shifts and weighting coefficients for a set of 3D Fourier basis functions. Below, we introduce a compact, but expressive parametrization of ˆV(Sec. 3.2), followed by a practical algorithm to estimate its free parameters from training data (Sec. Contrary to other C-STVSR methods (Chen et al., 2022; 2023b; Kim et al., 2025), our trigonometric expansion over(x, y, t)can be sampled at arbitrary spatial and temporal resolutions with a single function call, without explicit frame warping. 2) consists of the backbone encoder, the VFF basis, and the PSF-aware sampler (Eq. As backbone encoder we employ RVRT (Liang et al., 2022), with the embedding dimension set to 90 and 12 attention heads. We use standard data augmentations (random flipping, rotation, and resizing) and train for2.5×10 6 iterations with anL 1 reconstruction loss using the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) optimizer (lr= 10−4,β 1 = 0.9,β 2 = 0.999,ϵ= 10 −8) and a Cosine Annealing scheduler (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016). To check the scalability of our model, we therefore also train a version with a higher parameter count (V3-Large, 20.6M parameters), obtained by increase the size of the attention embedding in the backbone encoder to 144. Table 2 compares V 3 to other C-STVSR methods (all trained on Adobe240) in this setting. Indeed, V3 appears to be the first C-STVSR method to substantially surpass per-frame image AISR across all scaling factors within and outside the training distribution. By combining VFF with a contemporary neural video encoder to predict its free parameters, we construct a clean, unified spatio-temporal super-resolution method that can upsample videos by arbitrary scaling factors in both space and time. Qualitative comparison of various C-STVSR methods at different time steps on Adobe240. Qualitative comparison of various C-STVSR methods at different time steps on Adobe240. 4.2.1, we also train our method specifically for the A VSR task, enabling direct comparison with prior work (Li et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2024). We denote this variant as V 2.5, which is architecturally identical to V 3-Large1, but trained on the REDS training set without temporal upsampling and supervised solely on the temporal coordinates of the input frames. Qualitative comparison of various C-STVSR methods at different time steps on GoPro. In SSIM, it is only outperformed by ST-A VSR (Shang et al., 2024), which leverages an auxiliary pre-trained VGG16 encoder to extract multi-scale structural and textural features. Qualitative comparison of various C-STVSR methods at different time steps on Vid4. B.2 COMPARISON WITHVSR METHODS We go one step further and compare V 2.5 to standard vi