REAL METHOD of "LogART: Pushing the Limit of Efficient Logarithmic Post-Training Quantization" (arXiv 2102.05426v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

PTQ usually requires a small subset of training data but produces less powerful quantized models than Quantization-Aware Training (QAT). To further employ the power of quan- tization, the mixed precision technique is incorporated in our framework by ap- proximating the inter-layer and intra-layer sensitivity. Some works such as neural architecture search (Zoph & Le, 2016) try to design and search a tiny network, while oth- ers, like quantization (Hubara et al., 2017), and network pruning (Han et al., 2015) are designed to compress and accelerate off-the-shelf well-trained redundant networks. training the original model and then ﬁnetune the quantized/pruned model. Therefore, there is more demand in industry for quan- tizing the neural networks without retraining, which is called Post-training Quantization. Analysis of the second-order error term indicates we can reconstruct each layer output to approximate the task loss degeneration. We ﬁnd that our method is applicable to a large variety of tasks and models. Moreover, we show that post-training quanti- zation can quantize weights to INT2 without signiﬁcant accuracy loss for the ﬁrst time. Thus given a feedforward neural network withn layers, we can denote the forward process by x(ℓ+1) =h(z(ℓ)) =h(W(ℓ)x(ℓ) + b(ℓ)), 1≤ℓ≤n, (1) whereh(·) indicates the activation function (ReLU in this paper). (2020) propose to learn the step size s by gradient descent in quantization-aware training (QAT). LAPQ (Nahshan et al., 2019) ﬁnds the optimal step size when the loss function is minimized without re-training the weights. Their motivations are all towards minimizing a ﬁnal objective, which is the task loss, i.e., min E[L( ˆw)], s.t. (3) While this optimization objective is simple and can be well-optimized in QAT scenarios, it is not easy to learn the quantized weight without end-to-end ﬁnetuning as well as sufﬁcient training data and computing resources. In post-training quantization settings, we only have full precision weights that w⋆ = arg minw E[L(w)] where w∈R and a small subset of training data to do calibration. Layers are mutual-independent, thus the Hessian is in the form of layer-diagonal1 and Kronecker- factored, i.e., ¯H(w(ℓ)) = E[x(ℓ)x(ℓ),T⊗ H(z(ℓ))], where⊗ is the Kronecker product. At last, the objective is transformed into a practical proxy signal, the change in feature-maps (z = Wx), and the quantized model can be obtained by a layer-by-layer feature map reconstruc- tion algorithm (with few calibration images). Recent works, like Bit-Split (Wang et al., 2020) and AdaQuant (Hubara et al., 2020), also take this layer-wise objective to improve the post-training quantization. 3 P ROPOSED METHOD 3.1 C ROSS -LAYER DEPENDENCY Denote the neural network output z(n) = f(θ), the loss function can be represented by L(f(θ)) whereθ = vec[w(1),T,..., w(n),T]T is the stacked vector of weights in all n layers. However, in practice, we cannot explicitly compute and store the Jacobian for each input data point in such a raw form. However, we should emphasize that distillation requires the same computation and data resources as in normal training procedure, which is impractical for PTQ with limited data. (w/2, h/2, ci+ 1) layer 1 (w, h, ci) layer 2 (w, h, ci*e) layer 3 (w, h, ci*e) (w, h, ci) + (a) A typical structure of CNN (taken from Radosavovic et al. Network is composed of a stem layer (ﬁrst convolu- tion on input images), a body and a head layer (average pool- ing with a fully connected layer). Blue sub-block means the layer-diagonal and each layer are mutual- independent; orange sub-block consider the dependency inside a building block and green parts measure all dependencies. 3.2 B LOCK RECONSTRUCTION Although the network output reconstruction has an accurate estimation of the second-order error, we ﬁnd in practice it is worse than the layer-by-layer reconstruction in PTQ. (2019) explained, the networks can have perfect expressivity when the number of parameters exceeds the number of data samples during training, but lower training error does not ensure lower test error. We ﬁnd layer-wise reconstruction acts like a regularizer which reduces the generalization error by matching each layer’s output distribution. Formally, if layer k to layerℓ (where 1≤k <ℓ≤n) form a block, the weight vector is deﬁned as ˜θ = vec[w(k),T,..., w(ℓ),T]T and the Hessian can be also transformed by ∆˜θT ¯H(˜θ)∆˜θ = E[∆z(ℓ),TH(z(ℓ))∆z(ℓ)]. Assume the Hessian matrix is layer-diagonal and optimize the layer output one-by-one. It does not consider cross-layer dependency and resemble existing methods (Nagel et al., 2020; Hubara et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). This method simultaneously optimizes all layers within a stage and thus considers more dependencies than the block-wise method. 1b orange part illustrated, while the inter-block loss is small and can be ignored in the opti- 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021 Algorithm 1: Pretrained FP model; Calibration dataset, iterationT for alli = 1, 2,...,N -th block in the FP model do Collect input data to the block x(i), the FP output z(i) and its gradient g(z(i)) ; for allj = 1, 2,...,T -iteration do Get quantized output ˆz(i) and compute ∆z(i) = z(i)− ˆz(i); Descend Eq. (16)); if Activation Quantization is triggered then Update the activation quantization step size (Eq. After optimization, compute the sensitivity for each layer and between layers (2-bit only); return Quantized model, Sensitivities for mixed precision; mization. Here we adopt adaptive rounding (Nagel et al., 2020) for weights and learned step size (Esser et al., 2020) for activation step size because we observe they generally perform better in PTQ, see details in Appendix B.4.1. Regarding the training lossL, we ﬁnd that nearly all existing literature (Cai et al., 2020; Hubara et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2019) uses layer-wise measurement. diagonal loss and off-diagonal loss, the ﬁrst is the same with previous works and measure the sensitivity of each layer independently, while the off-diagonal loss is used to measure the cross-layer sensitivity. We use genetic algorithm (Guo et al., 2020) to search the optimal bitwidth conﬁguration with hardware performance threshold, the algorithm is located in algorithm 2. In this section, we compare our algorithm (post-training quantization) with some quantization-aware training methods, including PACT (Choi et al., 2018), DSQ (Gong et al., 2019), LSQ (Esser et al., 2020), and a mixed precision technique HAQ