REAL METHOD of "Temporal Generalization: A Reality Check" (arXiv 2509.23487v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We benchmark several methods within these categories on a diverse set of temporal tasks, including language modeling, news summarization, news tag prediction, academic paper categorization, satellite image-based land use classification over time, and historical yearbook photo gender prediction. Our empirical findings show that none of the evaluated methods consistently outperforms the simple baseline of using the latest available model parameters in all scenarios. After being trained on retrospective data, these models are deployed in real-world applications, particularly in high-stake domains such as finance, healthcare, and autonomous systems, where the distribution of the data the model sees could drift over time. Failures in these contexts can lead to severe financial losses or pose significant risks to human safety. Yet, despite significant progress and widespread adoption, ML models suffer from performance degradation on data collected after the training period [Jaidka et al., 2018, Luu et al., 2021, Nylund et al., 2024]. Figure 1 (left) shows this challenge, illustrating a 30% increase in perplexity when a model trained on past news summarization data is evaluated on future months, compared to a model adapted with more recent data. The substantial financial and computational costs associated with training these foundation models [Cottier et al., 2024] make frequent retraining economically impractical. The evaluation was conducted using data from March 2012 onward.(Right) T emporal generalization framework.Across sequential learning stages ( St on the y-axis), a model fθt is trained on data Dt (orange) initialized with θt−1 from the previous stage. This method operates under the hypothesis that the temporal evolution of model parameters, observable from historical training dynamics [Nylund et al., 2024], can inform predictions about future parameters, even in the absence of future data access. Addressing these prevailing gaps, we provide the first holistic evaluation of these interpolation and extrapolation methods within large-scale settings. We adhere to the strict constraint of no access to the future and evaluate with multiple monthly and yearly temporal datasets and model architectures. Infeasibility of non-linear approaches.Ideally, one could capture temporal dynamics by training a sequence model, such as a RNN on a series of checkpoints [Bai et al., 2023] or by using compressed representations obtained by autoencoder [Cai et al., 2024]. Such parameter prediction techniques have been confined to small-scale models such as a 10-layer LSTM on toy datasets, inapplicable to widely used T5 [Raffel et al., 2020] and densenet-121 [Huang et al., 2017] architectures. First, its success depends on a large, fixed pre-trained model to constrain the temporal updates, which is not applicable to settings without large-scale pre-training, such as the Wilds-Time datasets [Yao et al., 2022a]. While model merging [Ilharco et al., 2022, Yadav et al., 2024, Davari and Belilovsky, 2024, Jang et al., 2024] has shown promise when models are trained on similar tasks or datasets, merging models trained on distinctly different datasets (as can be the case with temporal data) is known to be challenging. 4.1 Non-convexity in Loss Surface Resulting in Non-Identifiability When models are trained independently at different time steps t, the resulting parameters θt may reside in disparate basins of the loss surface. Specifically, when training the model for time step t on dataset Dt, we initialize its parameters with θt−1, the optimized parameters obtained from training on Dt−1. 1) No method consistently improves performance over the recent model.Our results show that most methods degraded performance compared to using only the most recent model. Comparison of ERM (trained on union of data up to time t) with DG (GroupDRO [Sagawa et al., 2020], IRM [Arjovsky et al., 2019], DeepCoral [Sun and Saenko, 2016]), CL methods (EWC [Kirkpatrick et al., 2017], AGEM [Chaudhry et al., 2019]), parameter interpolation (Average, Downscaling, Recent), and Taylor extrapolation over δ future months. 3) Continual learning is important.Figure 6 compares CL with training each timestamp model independently, initialized from a pre-trained T5-small checkpoint. CL yields smooth, coherent paths (Figure 14), contrasting sharply with the disjoint and noisy trajectories observed when models are trained independently from a pre-trained model (Figure 15). All methods perform better with a CL backbone than with a pre-trained initialization because the parameters for adjacent time steps must lie close to each other. 6 Limitations and Future Directions Fundamental constraints on temporal generalization.The challenge of temporal generalization is subject to fundamental theoretical constraints, notably those underscored by the No Free Lunch theorem. Without strong and empirically validated assumptions regarding the nature of temporal distribution shifts, 8 2012-012012-072013-012013-072014-012014-072015-012015-072016-012016-07 Time 1002.4 1002.6 1002.8 1003.0Paremeter norm News summarization Continual learning Pre-trained initialization Figure 4:Why downscaling works?The L2 norm of model parameters increases over time under con- tinual learning, while it remains flat for models reini- tialized at each step. As a promising first step, we begin by capturing this relationship with two approaches below: Approaches that train auxiliary models over the parameters of a network, such as recurrent networks [Bai et al., 2023] or autoencoders [Cai et al., 2024], exemplify this problem. [2023] has a complexity of O(N d+C), with N being the parameter count of the predictive model, d the width of the last hidden layer, and C the parameter count of preceding layers. Similarly, training an autoencoder on the full parameter set [Cai et al., 2024] of widely used architectures is computationally infeasible. Let Ttrain be the set of training timestamps for which forward transfer is evaluated. Given the sequence of T total datasets {Dt}T t=1 (as defined previously), this set of training timestamps is Ttrain = {t| 1 ≤t≤T−δ} . Let Mt,j denote the performance (e.g., accuracy) of the model associated with training timestamp t∈T train (e.g., θt), when evaluated on data from a future timestamp j. , t+ δ) are available and valid, thenN eval =|T train| ·δ. This is then averaged over all training timestamps in Ttrain. WorstFWT = 1 |Ttrain| X t∈Ttrain min k∈{1,...,δ