REAL METHOD of "Embodied Navigation Foundation Model" (arXiv 2509.12129v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

The results include cross-task and cross-embodiment performence of our method. By dynamically adjusting these TVI tokens, our method enables co-tuning across different camera setups and supports joint training with both image-QA and video-QA samples (Shen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023). Furthermore, to address the constraints of practical deployment such as hardware memory cost and inference speed, we propose a token Budget-Aware Temporal Sampling (BATS) strategy, which dynamically samples navigation history tokens based on a forgetting curve constrained by a token budget. This token sampling approach balances performance and inference speed, enhancing the practicality of our method for real-world deployment. On HM3D- OVON (Yokoyama et al., 2024b), our method achieves45.2%SR in a zero-shot setting, outper- forming the previous fine-tuned SOTA method (43.6%SR). 2 RELATEDWORKS Large models for Navigation.Integrating Large Models (LLMs and VLMs) into robotic navi- gation has shifted the field from traditional learning-based methods toward leveraging pre-trained knowledge for open-world understanding and strong generalization capability. However, existing methods mostly focus on isomorphic embodiments, overlooking the potential training synergy between different embodiments and tasks. We consider a general navigation setting in which a mobile em- bodiment is given a textual instructionLand a sequence of imagesI 1:N 1:T ∈R W×H×3 , captured on-the-fly fromNdifferent cameras at time steps{1, ..., T}. Basic Architecture.We extend vanilla video-based vision-language models (VLMs) (Li et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024) to a dual-branch architecture for both navigation and question-answering (Wang et al., 2025c). For navigation, we first encode the observed imagesI1:N 1:T using vision encoders and a cross-modality projector (Liu et al., 2023a) to obtain visual tokensE 1:N 1:T . In this case, we use fine-grained featuresV fine for the latest navigation obser- vation and image QA (at time stepT), while using coarse-grained features for navigation history and video data (across time steps1 :T). 5 B=2048 B=1600B=1280B=960B=640 B=1960T=50T=175T=125 (a) 𝑃(𝑡,𝑇)of fixed token budget B(b) 𝑃(𝑡,𝑇=125)with different budget B(c) Inferencetimeof BATS Figure 5:Visualization of BATS and corresponding time cost.(a) Given a fixed token budgetB= 1600, we illustrate the sampling probability at different timestepstfor the latest timestepT. (b) Given a maximum timestepT= 125, we plot the sampling probability across different timestepstunder varying token budgets B. To this end, we proposeBudget-Aware Temporal Sampling (BATS), which is designed for (a) practi- cal purposes (i.e., constraining the maximum token length to accommodate inference speed and GPU memory limitations), (b) retaining more recent information to enhance understanding and planning while preserving sufficient historical context for navigation, and (c) direct adaptability to varying numbers of cameras. In this case, when the number of captured frame tokens exceeds the token budget, we compute a sampling probability for each frame: However, this situation rarely occurs (for the list task in Figure 2), as most timesteps are approximately122steps in VLN-CE RxR (Ku et al., 2020). It can be observed that our method smoothly obtains reasonableP(t)under different token budgetsBand timestepsT. For Video QA, we incorporateEBase+Ptime(TimePE(t))to encode temporal in- formation for each frame, and employ coarse-grained visual tokens (4 tokens per frame) to avoid an excessive number of tokens. The trajectory loss is computed using the mean squared error (MSE)L nav =MSE(τ idx, τidx gt ), there idx denotes the valid action indices. Given a batch containing both navigation and QA samples, the total loss is defined asL=βL nav +L QA. Comprasion of number of training samples with previouse methods. Nevertheless, experiments show that our method generalizes to state-of-the-art open-vocabulary object goal searching, as presented in Table 3. 3.3 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS Training Configurations.Our model is trained on a cluster server equipped with 56 NVIDIA H100 GPUs for approximately 72 hours, resulting in a total of 4,032 GPU hours. During training, the vision encoders (DINOv2 Oquab et al. Following the training paradigm of VLM (Liu et al., 2023a), we fine-tune only the designated trainable parameters for a single epoch. 9 VisionEncoders(Frozen) Visual token features Visualfeatures DatabaseMLPAdapter(Trainable) Visual Tokens Cached Visual Features (Offline) Avg. Training Time without cachewith cache 10x Speed up 2.9x Faster 1.8x Less Figure 8:Offline Visual Feature Cached.We pre- computed video frames and navigation hisitroy and saved as corase visual tokens. (1) How does Nav- FoM perform on diverse navigation tasks across different benchmarks? (2) How well does NavFoM perform in real-world environments? (3) Are the key design components of our method effective? Our method is compared against strong baselines on each benchmark. We evaluate our method on various navigation tasks, including VLN, searching, tracking, and autonomous driving, which are across different embodiments (e.g., egocentric, four- camera, six-camera, and eight-camera configurations). We evaluate our method on the V AL-Unseen splits of the VLN-CE R2R (Krantz et al., 2020) and RxR (Ku et al., 2020) benchmarks, which require the robot to follow instructions in unseen indoor environments. We also evaluate our method on the Open-UA V benchmark (Wang et al., 2024a), which requires the UA V to follow instructions in unseen outdoor environments. We evaluate our method on EVT-Bench (Wang et al., 2025c), a challenging benchamrak requrie the robot to distinguish and follow target within crowded environments. We evaluate our method on mainstream benchmarks, namely nuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020a) and NA VSIM (Dauner et al., 2024b), for open-loop and pseudo-simulation evaluation. Our method takes as input online-captured RGB videos from a variable number of cameras (each captur- ing one frame after a step is taken) along with a textual instruction, and outputs the next trajectory (Equation 6). Note that our method uses trajectories directly collected from the Trav- elUA V (Wang et al., 2024a) training split (mimicking ground truth trajectories), as no strong baseline was available to collect expert trajectories as was done for the ObjectNav data collection. On the more challenging V AL UNSEEN split, our method 