REAL METHOD of "Rethinking Consistent Multi-Label Classification under Inexact Supervision" (arXiv 2510.04091v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this paper, we propose consistent approaches that do not rely on the aforementioned conditions to handle both problems in a unified way. Specifically, we propose two risk estimators based on first- and second-order strategies. Empirically, extensive experimental re- sults on both real-world and synthetic datasets validate the effectiveness of our proposed approaches against state-of-the-art methods. The goal of MLC is to induce a multi-label classifier that can assign multiple relevant labels to unseen instances. However, annotating multi-label training data is more expensive and demanding than annotating single-label data. In PML, each instance is annotated with acandidate label set, among which only some labels are relevant but inaccessible to the learning algorithm (Xie & Huang, 2018; Sun et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2021). The candidate label set consists of four relevant labels {apple,plate,table,jug} and two false-positive ones {grapes,pear}. Here, consistency means that classifiers learned with inexact supervision are theoretically guar- anteed to converge to the optimal classifiers when infinitely many training samples are pro- vided (Wang et al., 2024). However, the flipping rate for each class is unknown and must be estimated using anchor points, i.e., instances belonging to a specific class with probability one (Liu & Tao, 2015; Xie & Huang, 2023). The model outputs of deep neural networks are usually one-hot encoded, which means they cannot yield reliable probabilistic outputs (Guo et al., 2017). To this end, we propose a novel framework named COMES, i.e.,COnsistent Multi-label classifica- tion under inExact Supervision. Based on a data generation process that does not use transition ma- 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 trices, we introduce two instantiations with risk estimators w.r.t. Table 1 compares our approach with existing consistent PML and CML approaches. • We propose a consistent framework for multi-label classification under inexact supervision that neither requires estimating the generation process of candidate or complementary labels nor relies on the uniform-distribution assumption. • We introduce risk-correction approaches to improve the generalization performance of the pro- posed risk estimators. 2 PRELIMINARIES In this section, we introduce the background of MLC and MLC under inexact supervision. For ease of notation, we introduce y“ry 1, y2, . In this paper, we focus primarily on the Hamming loss and ranking loss, the two most common metrics in the literature. 1 Specifically, the Hamming loss calculates the fraction of misclassified instance-label pairs, and the risk offw.r.t. Since optimizing the 0-1 loss is difficult, a surrogate loss functionℓis often adopted. the Hamming loss is Rℓ Hpgq“E ppx,Yq „ 1 q ÿq j“1 ℓpg jpxq, yjq ȷ ,(2) whereℓis a non-negative binary loss function, such as the binary cross-entropy loss. It is important to note that the Hamming loss only considers first-order model predictions and cannot account for label correlations. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Similarly, when using a surrogate loss functionℓto replace the 0-1 loss, theℓ-risk w.r.t. the ranking loss is Rℓ Rpgq“E ppx,Yq „ÿ 1ďjăkďq Ipyj‰y kqℓ ˆ gjpxq´g kpxq, yj´y k`1 2 ˙ȷ .(4) Notably, minimizing the Hamming loss does not consider label correlations and can be considered a first-order strategy. The goal of PML or CML is to learn a prediction functionf:XÞÑ2 Y that can assign relevant labels to unseen instances based on a training setD“tpx i, Siqun i“1 sampled i.i.d. 3 METHODOLOGY In this section, we first introduce our data generation process. Then, we present the first- and second- order strategies for handling the PML problem and their respective theoretical analyses. Theorem 4.When the binary loss functionℓis symmetric, i.e.,ℓpz,¨q`ℓp´z,¨q“MwhereMis a non-negative constant, then under the assumption in Lemma 1, theℓ-risk w.r.t. Here, the symmetric-loss assumption is often used to ensure statistical consistency of the ranking loss for MLC (Gao & Zhou, 2013). the ranking loss when the number of training data increases. Lower is better for theranking loss,one error,Hamming loss,coverage; higher is better for theaverage precision. Following standard prac- tice (Liu et al., 2023), we evaluated withranking loss, one error, Hamming loss, coverageand average precisionon real-world sets, and withmean average precision (mAP)on synthetic datasets. For real-world datasets, we used an MLP encoder for all baselines, trained for 200 epochs with a learning rate of 5e-3, weight decay of 1e-4, and the SGD optimizer with cosine decay. image datasets, we adopted a ResNet-50 backbone pretrained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), trained for 30 epochs with a learning rate of 1e-4 using the Adam optimizer. We instantiatedℓwith the binary cross-entropy loss for COMES-HL and the sigmoid loss for COMES-RL. the Hamming loss and ranking loss, two widely used evaluation metrics for MLC, respectively. Do we need zero training loss after achieving zero training error? InProceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. A MOREDETAILS ABOUT THEALGORITHM A.1 ALGORITHMICPSEUDO-CODE Algorithm 1COMES-HL and COMES-RL Input:Multi-label classifiersg, PML datasetD, epoch numberT max, iteration numberI max. , I max do 4:Fetchmini-batchD j fromD; 5:ForwardDand get the outputs ofg; 6:ifusing the COMES-HL algorithmthen 7:Calculatingthe loss based on Eq. (8); 8:else ifusing the COMES-RL algorithmthen 9:Calculatingthe loss based on Eq. (6) and then apply the mixture proportion estimation algorithm. Algorithm 2Class-prior Estimation Input:Mixture proportion estimation algorithmA, PML datasetD. R1 n,ppGq“E Xn Eσ « sup gjPG ˇˇˇˇ 1 n ÿn i“1 σigjpxiq ˇˇˇˇ ff .(20) Then, we introduce the following lemmas. the Hamming or ranking lossR0´1 if and only if it holds for any sequencetgtuthat ifR ℓpgqÑ Rℓ˚, thenR 0´1pgqÑR ˚. For each class, we randomly sample a fraction of the training data and assign that class as a non-candidate label.