REAL METHOD of "Doubly-Regressing Approach for Subgroup Fairness" (arXiv 2510.21091v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

kwkim.online@gmail.com,{ppleeqq, rieky0426}@snu.ac.kr, dongyoon.yang@sk.com, ydkim0903@gmail.com ABSTRACT Algorithmic fairness is a socially crucial topic in real-world applications of AI. In this paper, we develop a novel learning algorithm for subgroup fairness which resolves these issues by focusing on subgroups with sufficient sam- ple sizes as well as marginal fairness (fairness for each sensitive attribute). Building on this formulation, we propose the Doubly Regress- ing Adversarial learning for subgroup Fairness (DRAF) algorithm, which reduces a surrogate fairness gap for supIPM with much less computation than directly re- ducing supIPM. Empirically, we show that the DRAF algorithm out- performs baseline methods in benchmark datasets, specifically when the number of sensitive attributes is large so that many subgroups are very small. Then, there are 2q subgroups, defined by Dv ={i:s i =v},forv∈ {0,1} q. (i)data sparsity, when certain subgroups contain very few samples, model estimation on such sub- groups becomes unstable and inaccurate (Molina & Loiseau, 2023); (ii)computational burden, the number of fairness constraints scales exponentially inq. 1 arXiv:2510.21091v2 [stat.ML] 27 Jan 2026 Various learning algorithms for subgroup fairness have been proposed to resolve the aforementioned two problems (Foulds et al., 2019b; Molina & Loiseau, 2023; Foulds et al., 2019a; Shui et al., 2022; Maheshwari et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024), but there are still several limitations. Existing algorithms either do not guarantee the marginal fairness (i.e., fairness on each sensitive attribute) which may lead to a socially unacceptable prediction model, or would be computationally demanding when an adversarial learning is required to measure fairness. The aim of this paper is to develop a learning algorithm for subgroup fairness which resolves data sparsity and computational burden simultaneously. A novel part of our proposed learning algorithm is to find a prediction model which achieves (active) subgroup fairness and marginal fairness simultaneously in the context of distributional fairness, the strongest notion of fairness (see Section 3.1 for definition), without resorting on heavy computational burden. For this purpose, we define asubgroup-subsetW⊆ {0,1} q as a union of certain subgroups, and focus onD W = S v∈W Dv.Our approach enforces the distributional fairness over pre-selected subgroup-subsets whose sizes are not small. Then, we design a novel adversarial training strategy termeddoubly regressing adversarial learningwhich learns a prediction model without heavy com- putational burden but guarantees the distributional fairness for all pre-selected subgroup-subsets. The doubly regressing adversarial learning algorithm requires only a single discriminator regard- less of the number of pre-selected subgroup-subsets and so computational demand is practically acceptable even whenqis large. We propose a surrogate fairness measure for supIPM which requires only a single discriminator regardless of the number of subgroup-subsets, and develop an adversarial learning algorithm calledDoubly Regressing Adversarial learning for Fairness(DRAF) algorithm to learn an ac- curate and subgroup-subset fair prediction model. Empirically, we show that the DRAF algorithm outperforms baseline methods in benchmark datasets, with large margins whenqis large so many subgroups are extremely small. 2 To resolve heavy computational burden, weak notions of fairness such as the DP (Demographic Par- ity) are employed in the fairness constraint (Kearns et al., 2018b;a) or post-processing techniques are used after learning a prediction model without fairness constraint (Hu et al., 2024). Our approachWe propose an in-processing algorithm for distributional fairness on pre-selected subgroup-subsets whose sizes are not too small. To relax the perfect fairness, we define (ψ-distributional) subgroup fairness gap for a given devianceψ(·,·)between two probability measures as∆ ψ(f) = sup s∈{0,1}q ψ(Pf,s,P f,·),whereP f,· is the marginal distribution off(X).Then, we sayfisψ-subgroup fairwith levelδ >0if∆ ψ(f)≤δ.The main goal of subgroup fair learning is to find an accurate prediction model amongψ-subgroup fair prediction models with levelδ. In Section 4.2, we develop a computationally efficient adversarial learning algorithm for subgroup-subset fairness, where only a single discriminator is used regardless of the size ofW.Furthermore, Table 4 in Section B.4 empirically supports the computational scalability of our proposed algorithm. In the following section, we propose a novel surrogate subgroup-subset fairness gap of supIPM which serves as an upper bound of supIPM and requires only a single discriminator to be computed. DOUBLYREGRESSINGADVERSARIAL LEARNING FORFAIRNESS(DRAF) Based on the DR gap, we introduceDRAF (Doubly Regressing Adversarial learning for Fairness) algorithm, which trainsfby minimizing 1 n Pn i=1 l(yi, f(xi, si)) +λDRn,W,G (f),for a given lossl (e.g., cross-entropy) and Lagrangian multiplierλ.A key feature is that a single discriminator is used regardless ofW. In the learning algorithm, we iteratively train the prediction modelfand the pair of discriminator gand weight vectorviteratively. At each iteration, we (i) updatefby applying a gradient descent algorithm to minimize 1 n Pn i=1 l(yi, f(xi, si)) +λz-DR 2(f,v, g)whilegandvare fixed, and then (ii) updategandvby applying a gradient ascent algorithm to maximizez-DR 2(f,v, g)whilef being fixed. Algorithm 1 in Section B.2 below provides the outline of our proposed algorithm. Model and Performance measuresSince the four datasets are for binary classification tasks, we only consider one dimensional prediction modelffor which we consider a single-layered MLP and apply the sigmoid activation at the output layer to return the prediction score between[0,1]. To find an optimal value ofγ,we plot Pareto-front lines (for manyγs) between Acc and SP using validation data, compute the area under the lines, and then choose the one with the largest area. For ADULTand DUTCH, the three methods REG, GF, and DRAF perform similarly on both first-order marginal and subgroup fairness. we observe that the three methods perform nearly the same on the training data. DRAF outperforms REG on both first-order marginal and subgroup fairness, and GF on first-order marginal fairness. Correlation between subgroup fairness and first-order marginal fairnessWe analyze the cor- relation bet