REAL METHOD of "Implicit Bias and Loss of Plasticity in Matrix Completion: Depth Promotes Low-Rankness" (arXiv 2603.04703v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We also revisit the loss of plasticityphenomenon in matrix completion (Kleinman et al., 2024), where pre-training on few observations and resuming with more degrades performance. We show that deep models avoid plasticity loss due to their low-rank bias, whereas depth-2 networks pre-trained under decoupled dynamics fail to converge to low- rank, even when resumed training (with additional data) satisfies the coupling condition—shedding light on the mechanism behind this phenomenon. Recent studies attribute this phenomenon to the implicit bias of neural networks, arguing that among the many possible global minima, first-order algorithms such as (stochastic) gradient descent favor solutions that generalize well (Neyshabur et al., 2014; 2017; Huh et al., 2021; Timor et al., 2023; Frei et al., 2023; Kou et al., 2023; Galanti et al., 2024; Jacot, 2022). Nevertheless, both theory and experiments indicate that training even a simple two-layer factorization (L= 2 ) with gradient descent, without explicit rank constraints, typically yields a low-rank solution under reasonable assumptions (Razin & Cohen, 2020; Bai et al., 2024; Ma & Fattahi, 2024). Investigating the implicit low-rank bias in matrix completion can also shed light on the phenomenon of “loss of plasticity”, a challenge widely observed in general neural network training (Shin et al., 2024; Ash & Adams, 2020; Achille et al., 2018; Berariu et al., 2021). The term loss of plasticity describes the tendency of neural networks, particularly after initial training, to lose their adaptability 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 to new information, hindering their generalization capabilities. In contrast, we empirically observe and prove that depth-2 networks pre-trained with limited observations (yielding decoupled dynamics) and subsequently trained with augmented observations (yielding coupled dynamics) fail to find a low-rank solution. The factor matrices {Wl}L l=1 are trained by minimizing an objective functionϕ, defined as the mean squared errorℓover the observed entries inΩ: Consistent with prior works, our analysis focuses ongradient flowdynamics (gradient descent with an infinitesimal step size) for a given objective functionϕ. We first demonstrate how thecoupling of training dynamicsserves as the key mechanism explaining data connectivity’s role in depth-2 models, through the completion of two previously introduced 2×2 matrices, MD and MC, as illustrative examples. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3.2 COUPLEDDYNAMICS INDEEPNETWORKSINDUCEIMPLICITBIASTOWARDSLOWRANK Section 3.1 illustrated the importance of coupled training dynamics, driven by data connectivity, for achieving low-rank solutions in simple two-layer factorizations ( L= 2 ). Pre-training utilizes 2000 randomly sampled entries (Ωpre; |Ωpre|= 2000 ), while post-training adds 1000 more, forming Ωpost (Ωpre ⊂Ω post; |Ωpost|= 3000 ). The middle panels show warm-start training on Ωpost, initialized from converged pre-trained models with Ωpre. 4 UNDERSTANDINGLOSS OFPLASTICITY INDEPTH-2 MATRIXCOMPLETION Studying the inherent tendency towards low-rank solutions in matrix completion can offer further insights into the loss of plasticity phenomenon. models pre-trained on limited observations struggle to adapt when training continues on augmented observations. We conduct an experiment using a rank-5 ground-truth matrix W ∗ ∈R 100×100, where pre-training is performed on a sparse observation set and post-training continues with additional observations. In Figure 3, we compare two post-training strategies:warm-starttraining, initialized from the pre- trained model, andcold-starttraining, initialized from scratch on the augmented observations, across different depths in terms of effective rank and reconstruction error. Consequently, further training on augmented data does not substantially increase the rank compared to training from scratch on the augmented observations. We then consider post-training on 2×2 (Section 4.2) and d×d (Section 4.3) matrices. (2024) observe that loss of plasticity is further intensified with increasing network depth, a conclusion they reached by measuring a “relative reconstruction loss” when compared to models trained from scratch on the augmented dataset. In their setup, training is run for a fixed number of iterations without waiting for convergence, whereas in our experiments we terminate each training phase once the loss falls below a fixed threshold. 4.1 PRE-TRAINING WITHDIAGONALOBSERVATIONS To clearly observe loss of plasticity in a setting consistent with Section 3.2, we pre-train using only diagonal entries, yielding a disconnected pattern. Then, assuming convergence to a zero-loss solution of the lossℓ(WA,B; Ω(d) pre), any entry apq(∞) of the converged matrix A(∞) and any entry bpq(∞) of the converged matrix B(∞) (for any p, q∈[d]) are given by: We analyze the scenario where training resumes from a state obtained through pre-training. Let the pre-training phase conclude at a sufficiently large timestep T1. For simplicity, we assume that the solution WA,B(T1) has perfectly converged with respect to the pre-training objective, neglecting any residual error due to the finite duration of this phase. 4.2 POST-TRAINING:2×2MATRIXEXAMPLE We aim to analyze scenarios where training is resumed under coupled dynamics, building upon solutions obtained from an initial decoupled pre-training phase (Proposition 4.1). To this end, we first define the specific pre-training setup for an illustrative2×2case: To make loss of plasticity particularly pronounced during the pre-training, we initialize the model with αI2 (for α >0), which is the m=∞ setting of our initialization scheme in (7). Without loss of generality, we assume w∗ 12 >0 is revealed, while the diagonal entries w∗ 11 and w∗ 22 from the pre-training phase remain observed. Then, running gradient flow during the subsequent post-training phase (for t≥T 1), starting fromA(T 1)andB(T 1), results in exponential decay of the loss: 4.3 POST-TRAINING:d×dMATRIX UNDERLAZYTRAININGREGIME We attribute Theorem 4.2 primarily to the model’s “lazy training” (Chizat et al., 2019) as large-norm initializations lead to faster loss decay, causing the model to converge to a nearby global minimum that may not be a low-rank solution. The following theorem states that when the model is initialized with a sufficiently small loss, resulting from warm-starting that perfectly fits all previously observed da