REAL METHOD of "OCR-Reasoning Benchmark: Unveiling the True Capabilities of MLLMs in Complex Text-Rich Image Reasoning" (arXiv 2505.17163v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this gap, we proposeOCR- Reasoning, a novel benchmark designed to systematically assess Multimodal Large Language Models on text-rich image reasoning tasks. Unlike ex- isting text-rich image understanding benchmarks that only provide a final answer, this benchmark additionally provides a detailed step-by-step reasoning process. Building upon techniques like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompt- ing (Wei et al., 2022) and test-time compute scaling (Jaech et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025a), slow- thinking systems typically engage in critical thinking and reflection before providing the final an- swer. (a) The percentage of answers in the benchmark’sQ&Apairs that can be retrieved from the OCR results. (b) An example where the answers can be retrieved from the OCR results. To bridge this critical gap in multimodal evaluation, we introduce OCR-Reasoning, a novel bench- mark designed to evaluate the text-rich image reasoning skills of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Furthermore, unlike other text-rich image understanding benchmarks that only annotate the final answers, OCR-Reasoning provides annotations for both the final answers and the step-by-step reasoning process. Additionally, we find that most of the existing reinforcement learning methods perform poorly on text-rich image reasoning tasks. • We introduce OCR-Reasoning, a challenging rich-text image reasoning benchmark that provides a systematic evaluation framework for assessing the reasoning capabilities of MLLMs in text-rich scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to concretely define various core sub-abilities for text-rich image reasoning and conduct systematic eval- uations. With the development of test-time compute scaling (Jaech et al., 2024; Cui et al., 2025), mathematical benchmarks requiring complex reasoning processes to obtain the answer are emerging as critical benchmarks for evaluating the reasoning capabilities of MLLMs. MathVision (Wang et al., 2024a) curates competition-level mathematical problems with authentic visual contexts. To address this limitation, we propose a comprehensive benchmark specifically designed to assess multimodal slow-thinking systems in complex text-rich image reasoning tasks. 3.1, we first present the data curation framework of OCR-Reasoning, comprising: No- tably, while existing benchmarks (Mathew et al., 2022; Masry et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024d) focus solely on final answers, OCR-Reasoning provides annotations for both the final answers and the step-by-step reasoning process, facilitating a more in-depth evaluation of MLLMs’ reasoning capa- bilities. Several document-oriented MLLMs (Wang et al., 2025c; Xiao et al., 2025; Guan et al., 2025) only focus on single images and have not been trained on multiple images. To address this, our annotators selected and transcribed college-level problems in chemistry, physics, geometry, functions, and statistics, which were then photographed to create a set of handwritten reasoning data. It consists of 476 Internet-sourced images, 253 real-world photographs, and 293 images from established benchmarks. First, our anno- tators will design questions based on the images to evaluate the reasoning ability of MLLMs. Step1:Jose Arcadio Buendia and Ursula Iguaran gave birth to a boy named Jose Arcadio, who was the son of Jose Arcadio Buendia. Step2:Jose Arcadio and Rebeca gave birth to a child, Aradio. Step3:Arcadio and Santa Sofia de la Piedad gave birth to a child named Jose Arcadio II. Step1:The study address is The Church Center, 548 Country Road, Singapore. Step2:Because Singapore is located near the equator, it doesn't snow in Singapore. Step3:The children cannot see snow when they are studying. Step2:Determine that f(x) is an odd function because 𝑓(−𝑥) =−𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑠(−𝑥)−sin(−𝑥) =− 𝑥cos𝑥+𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑥= −𝑓(𝑥), implying symmetry about the origin, thus excluding options B and D. Step3:Evaluate f(x) at𝑥= 𝜋 ∶ 𝑦=𝑓( 𝜋) = 𝜋 ∗ cos 𝜋+ sin 𝜋=− 𝜋< 0 , further excluding option B (although already excluded in Step2). Step1:To determine how much cheaper Package One is compared to buying the items separately, let's break down the costs: Step3:Therefore, the savings when buying Package One instead of the items separately are: Then, we implemented a majority voting system where the final category assignment was determined by plurality consensus among the three annotators. Given a question, a detailed response from an MLLM, and a ground truth of the reasoning trajectory, an LLM judge is asked to directly assign a score to detailed responses. “Solve the com- plex problem through step-by-step reasoning.” For text-only Large Language Models (LLMs), we substitute visual inputs with the OCR results (using PP-OCRv3 (Li et al., 2022) to obtain the OCR results) while retaining identical textual queries. Although document-oriented MLLMs are effective at basic comprehension, their limitations in deeper reasoning underscore the need for innovations in model architecture or training strategies. Some reinforcement learning methods perform poorly on text-rich image reasoning tasks.The performance of some reinforcement learning methods on text-rich image reasoning tasks is relatively poor compared to their baseline. In con- trast to existing benchmarks that focus solely on final-answer accuracy, OCR-Reasoning incorpo- rates annotations for both the final answers and the corresponding step-by-step reasoning processes. First, since most of our data collection and annotation processes are performed manually, the high costs associated with these processes have resulted in our dataset size being comparable to previous methods (Liu et al., 2024d; Xu et al., 2025). Consequently, the LLM assigns a relatively high score to their problem-solving procedures. $31.97 Problem If you have already bought a Green Salad, and then want to buy two 4-piece ﬁsh and one 6 jumbo shrimp, how much will it cost in total? Qwen2.5-VL-72B To calculate the total cost, let's break down the prices step by step: Method Overall Spatial NumericalAnalysis Mathematical Enumerative LogicalMultidisciplinaryKnowledge Qwen2.5-VL-7B (base model) 15.7 13.8 11.6 8.8 20.1 9.0 35.8Qwen2.5-VL-7B (Fine-tune) 17.0 14.7 10.6 21.6 22.9 17.4 26.3 A.5 USE THEDATACURATIONFRAMEWORK TOANNOTATETRAININGDATA We leveraged our annotation logic to replace human annotators with DouBao-1.5-Vision-Pro, select- ing 5000 images from DocVQA, InfoVQA, TextVQA, and ChartQA for synthetic data generation. Using this data, we will train a p