REAL METHOD of "(Token-Level) \textbf{InfoRMIA}: Stronger Membership Inference and Privacy Assessment for LLMs" (arXiv 2510.05582v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Stronger Membership Inference and Memorization Assessment for LLMs Jiashu Tao†, and Reza Shokri†‡ † National University of Singapore,‡ Google Research {jiashut, reza}@comp.nus.edu.sg October 10, 2025 Abstract Machine learning models are known to leak sensitive information, as they inevitably memorize (parts of) their training data. More alarmingly, large language models (LLMs) are now trained on nearly all available data, which amplifies the magnitude of information leakage and raises serious privacy risks. The standard method to quantify privacy is via membership inference attacks, where the state-of-the-art approach is the Robust Membership Inference Attack (RMIA). Our method consistently outperforms RMIA across benchmarks while also offering improved computational efficiency. We propose a new perspective for studying membership and memorization in LLMs: 1 Introduction In the past decade, researchers have shown that machine learning (ML) models inevitably mem- orize parts of their training data [6, 7]. It is increasingly concerning as the contemporary, easily accessi- ble large language models (LLMs) are trained on datasets so large that we are running out of training data [22]. The current standard for quantifying privacy is membership inference attacks (MIAs) [19], where the attacker or privacy auditor aims to determine if a given data sample was part of the target model’s training set. A stronger attack means the attacker can more accurately distinguish members (training data) from non-members, implying that the target model leaks more of its training data. This ability to separate members from non-members not only signals privacy risk but also raises the possibility of training data reconstruction. Robust Membership Inference Attack (RMIA) [26], but its dependence on a separate population dataset, whose size scales linearly with the training set, could be a potential concern, especially for LLMs. In the first part of the paper, we thoroughly analyze RMIA, from its formulation to signal computation, and propose a more principled statistical test by casting RMIA’s setup as a com- posite hypothesis testing problem. Our approach can also be interpreted through information theory, where we quantify dominance over population data in bits rather than in sample counts. Assigning a single membership label to an entire sequence, list of outputs rather than a single one, compresses rich token-based information into a single bit, losing granularity and analogous to a lossy compression (Figure 1a). To address this issue, in the second part, we propose a token-level MIA framework to bet- ter quantify memorization and information leakage from LLMs with finer granularity and more meaningful analysis. First, since each token completion is one prediction step, analyzing leakage at the token level naturally aligns with model behavior and the definition of MIA. (1) we propose InfoRMIA, a princi- pled and efficient improvement over RMIA that achieves new SOTA performance; and (2) we introduce a token-level privacy assessment framework, which offers finer-grained insights into memorization and leakage in LLMs, while achieving strong membership inference capabilities. 2 Related Work 2.1 Membership Inference Membership inference [19] is a class of inference attacks that aims to determine if any given point queryxis part of the training set of a machine learning modelθ. [19] trained shadow models to predict the membership label directly. [25] proposed a simpler approach that uses the loss values as the membership signal. [24] trained a set of reference models on the population dataset, and counted the number of them with lower probability on the targetx. [2] constructed reference models that train with or without the target point to simulate two distributions of model outputs on the targetx: Assuming Gaussians, the attacker computes the likelihood ratios under the two distributions as the membership signal. Membership inference techniques on CNNs and MLPs can be adapted to work on LLMs, where the goal is to predict if any giventext sequenceis part of the training dataset. Due to the high computation cost to train reference models, LLM-specific MIAs tend to be reference model- free. [5] published a benchmark, MIMIR, to evaluate LLM MIAs and found that all of these methods perform poorly on pretrained LLMs. Each sequence is more than one training sample; it resembles a dataset containingk−1 training (subsequence, label) pairs. To properly adapt existing MIAs to LLMs, we should treat each token generation step, which “labels” each “prefixal” subsequence (subsequences from the start), as one prediction and compute its membership likelihood. In comparison, the existing framework only computes a single membership signal for each sequence, which is a highly compressed signal, losing rich information at each token position. We propose to conduct InfoRMIA (Equation 3) token by token, treating all tokensxas labels for their respective prefixal substrings and compute a token-based score. Datasets FT Epochs RMIA InfoRMIA InfoRMIA (token) AUC TRP@FPR AUC TRP@FPR AUC TRP@FPR AG News 1 0.839 0.00%0.843 23.0%0.836 20.2% 40.9450.00%0.94516.2% 0.94220.6% ai4privacy 1 0.643 6.6%0.644 10.6%0.620 9.0% 4 0.821 26.0%0.822 27.2%0.804 23.2% Pretrained LLMsBesides finetuned models, we also evaluate our newly proposed method on pretrained models (Table 3-8) on the most popular benchmark, MIMIR [5]. Ideally, the reference models should have the same model architecture and be trained on the same data distribution as the target LLM, but with (partially) disjoint datasets 10 (which effectively makes them OUT models in RMIA’s terminology). In particular, we use thePythia-160Mcheckpoint after the first step as our sole reference model 5. We further show that our method is the strongest reference-based MIA for pretrained LLMs, outperforming prior reference-model approaches (Ref). We also show that our method is the strongest reference-based MIA for pretrained LLMs, compared to Ref. D.3.1 Explanations of All Attack Methods We will briefly explain the score formulation of each attacking method in the MIMIR benchmark. The results show that our method has strongest inference power (highest TPR at small FPRs), while achieving very competitive results on AUCs. TheNeighbormethod is not included due to its computational complexity and relatively inferior performance reported in prior works.ReCaLLis not included for reasons in Appendix D.