REAL METHOD of "The Deleuzian Representation Hypothesis" (arXiv 2512.19734v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

THEDELEUZIANREPRESENTATIONHYPOTHESIS Cl´ement Cornet, Romaric Besanc ¸on & Herv´e Le Borgne Universit´e Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France {clement.cornet,romaric.besancon,herve.le-borgne}@cea.fr ABSTRACT We propose an alternative to sparse autoencoders (SAEs) as a simple and effective unsupervised method for extracting interpretable concepts from neural networks. Moreover, sparse autoencoders (and similar methods) rely on feature sparsity as a proxy for interpretability, a choice that has been criticized as potentially inadequate (Sharkey et al., 2025). We introduce an alternative to sparse autoencoders (SAEs) for extracting features that correspond to interpretable concepts from neural networks. Our method extracts diverse concepts from image, text and audio models. Our method captures the desired attributes more effectively than recent SAE-based approaches. The proposed principle is theoretically grounded in discrim- inant analysis and clustering, and further relates to Deleuze’s philosophical notion of “concepts.” Similar to SAE-based approaches, our method is fully unsupervised and therefore does not require manual specification or annotation of the identified concepts. Before proposing our approach, we first discuss the criteria such concepts should satisfy. Because they are trained to minimize reconstruction error, such approaches are driven to capture as much variance in the acti- vation space as possible, subject to sparsity constraints. Our objective is to extract concepts from model activations, at a given layer withDdimensions, over a dataset ofNsamples. Since our approach is fully unsupervised, we cannot restrainDto contrastive pairs between two classes. 2.4 LOSSLESSSTEERING Sparse autoencoders and related methods allow steering of extracted concepts (Zhou et al., 2025). If one steers a concept by+α, then by−α, we retrieve exactly the base activation. By avoiding projections into and out of the concept space, our approach enables lossless steering: We only consider encoder models, (including the encoder of BART). This choice allows us to evaluate the quality of extracted concepts with respect to supervised 4 labels that are likely represented at the analyzed layer of each model, since our objective is to com- pare concept extraction methods. BaselinesSparse autoencoders (SAE) are predominant among concept extraction methods. We compare our method to five different types of SAEs: standard SAE, trained with anL 2 recon- struction loss, and enforcing sparsity via anL 1 penalty which requires a coefficientλ; • GatedSAE (Gat-SAE) (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024a): we compare our method with publicly avail- able, pretrained sparse autoencoders on two models. For DinoV2 experiments, we use ViT-Prisma (Joseph et al., 2025), and for Pythia we use a sparse autoencoder trained by EleutherAI2. We also compare our approach to Independant Component Analysis (ICA) (Comon, 1994), that is a linear decomposition method maximizing statistical independence between latent dimensions. To this end, we assess probe loss across tasks characterized by diverse attribute sets, thereby quantifying the capacity of our approach to capture multiple, semantically meaningful concepts. Note that, while prior work on sparse autoencoders has emphasized reconstruction–sparsity trade-offs, these objectives are not applicable to our framework; we therefore exclude them from evaluation. All the reported results are computed using activations from the last transformer block of each encoder, using a concept space with 6144 dimensions, corresponding to 8 times the size of the activations (except for ICA, that is limited to 768). For each attribute, Probe Loss measures how well a one-dimensional logistic probe can recover the ground-truth attribute from the extracted concepts. Specifically, we train a separate 1D logistic probe for every concept and record the lowest cross-entropy loss achieved. From Table 1, our method globally outperforms all variations of SAE, with the lowest probe loss on 13 of the 20 tested tasks. Quantitative evaluation (Probe Loss, lower is better) of unsupervised approaches on CLIP and DinoV2 image encoders, DeBERTa and BART text encoders and Audio Spectrogram Trans- former on audio. On several cases, probe loss is midway between supervised LDA and the second most effective unsupervised method (typically TopKSAE). Note that LDA obtains poor results on BART over CoNLL-2003, which indicates that the additional hypothesis made by LDA compared to our method (normal distribution of concepts and homoscedasticity) are not satisfied in this particular case. Results from Table 2 show that our approach generally extracts more consistent concepts than other models, except for VanillaSAE, but this method reaches much lower concept quality and diversity according to Table 1. Here, we steer the final transformer layer of its encoder before passing the modified representation into the decoder. KMeans✓0.0133 0.1184 24.3 14.6 0.8685 0.9195 diff Tk-SAE✗0.0134 0.1093340.5109.20.34070.1737 diff KMeans✗0.0128 0.0841 17.9 5.65 0.6504 0.8357 diff KMeans✓0.0119 0.0665124.4 182.00.5677 0.3908 We conduct an ablation study of our method, to assess the impact of three aspects on its perfor- mance. Second, we evaluate the im- pact of using a clustering to identify the concepts, by replacing the the KMeans clustering of our approach with an SAE, trained on the activations or the differences. Figure 5 evaluates the performance of our method while extracting a number of concepts smaller than 6144. This highlights the ability of our method toefficientlyrecover concepts. Sparse AutoencodersSparse autoencoders (SAEs) (Lee et al., 2007) are a sparse dictionary learn- ing technique that aims to find a sparse decomposition of data into an overcomplete set of features. Analogous methods have been developed in order to find rela- tions between different layers of a same network, including transcoders (Dunefsky et al., 2024) and crosscoders (Lindsey et al., 2024).ArchetypalSAE (Fel et al., 2025) constrains the decoder training in order to gain stability, while Spade (Hindupur et al., 2025) is a distance based SAE. Probe loss evaluation shows that the extracted concept space captures attributes expected from labeled datasets, and our approach outperforms existing methods on this metric. As our method allows lossless steering, such intervention on model inner representations could be used at a larger scale, for ex