REAL METHOD of "Non-Collaborative User Simulators for Tool Agents" (arXiv 2509.23124v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Recent studies have adopted user simulation methods to develop these agents in multi-turn settings. We propose a novel user sim- ulator architecture that simulates four categories of non-collaborative behaviors: (2025) trains user simulators through SFT and subsequent GRPO training with LLM-as- a-judge reward. We first examined various types of user behaviors from both fields and clustered those that share similar features and then identified four representative categories: For example, when a user requests “Book me a window seat on the train”, but the train booking API does not support seat selection options, the agent cannot fulfill the specific seat preference—making this an unavailable service request. For example, a user booking a train might also ask, “By the way, where do you think I should visit first traveling in 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 You want to reserve a train from Norwich to Cambridge for two people. For example, when the user’s intended goal is “train reservation for 2 people”, a complete utterance is “I want to reserve a train for 2 people”. Using this collaborative foundation, we incorporate the non-collaborative behaviors identified in §3.1 through various interventions with LLM modules (all prompts for LLM modules are in §G). And if possible, request [train should be window seats, train should support wheel chair accessibility, train should be first class] A travel enthusiast planning a trip to North America. train_book Input Parameters {train_schedule_id, people} Agent notifies failureElse Else No left information to provide Collaborative User Simulator Impatient Utterance Generator Dialogue Act Classifier No remaning information to provide Mode1: The user simulator adjustment method for each non-collaborative user simulation. This illustrates the entire non-collaborative behavior simulation method we defined. Since our user simulator generates user complaints when the tool agent fails to respond to tangential topics, GPT-4.1-nano’s limited tangential respond- ing capability leads to more user complaints, resulting in frequent task-solving failures within the constrained 30 reasoning step limit. We first constructed a training dataset with equal proportions of the four non-collaborative behavior types and trained a “Uniformly weighted” agent. If there are specific customer types that require more attention in certain domains, or if minimum performance criteria must be met across all customer types, it is reasonable to increase the training data proportion for those categories. 5 CONCLUSION In this work, we define four types of non-collaborative user behaviors and propose a novel sim- ulation method for dialogue-based interactions. Our framework enables researchers to develop more robust training methodologies and dialogue strategies for building tool agents capable of handling the broader spectrum of real-world user interactions. Incomplete Utterance PoolWe construct our Incomplete Utterance Pool from LMSYS (and WildChat) by first filtering conversations to English and non-redacted samples, then extracting user- only turns and discarding messages with length≤10. We designed each domain to have one retrieve API and one book API, except for the taxi domain which only has a book API. MultiWOZ API List Retrieve API Book API Helper API accommodation retrieve, train retrieve, restaurant retrieve accommodation book, train book, restaurant book, taxi book, book cancel show app description, show api description, show api documentation show_app_description() show_api_description(”train”) show_api_documentation (”train”, “train_retrieve”) train: An app capable of retrieving or booking train schedules. “Book the specific train schedule...” <Full documenation of “train_retrieve”> Figure 6: Despiteτ-bench having higher difficulty, the fact that Mul- tiWOZ has more average reasoning steps indicates that the number of reasoning steps and task difficulty are not strongly correlated. For instance, Qwen3-30b-a3b shows no performance drop in unavailable service scenarios in both settings, and GPT-4.1-nano at the 30-step limit does not expe- rience performance degradation in impatience scenarios, while at the 50-step limit it shows a small decrease. Since successful booking requires successful retrieval, our evaluation is already covering the agent’s capability on retrieval tasks. The main reason we evaluated task success or failure based on booking completion, exclud- ing retrieval-only scenarios, is the difficulty and inaccuracy involved in determining the success or failure of retrieval tasks on their own. In addition, it is difficult to identify success or failure based on whether all necessary constraints are set in the parameters of retrieval API calls, because sometimes the agent performs constraint-based filtering on its own based on the retrieved entries. Specifically, for each agent turn in a dialogue, we created a separate training example consisting of the cumulative dialogue history up to that step as input, and the agent’s current turn as the prediction target. To ensure that only the target turn contributes to the loss, we masked all previous tokens (assigned label−100) and supervised only on the current agent utterance. train -> API call{’api_name’:’show_api_description’,’input_parameters’:{’ app_name’=’train’}} # To get the specification of a particular api, e.g. Could you help me find and book this train? Agent:I’m sorry, but I am unable to access train booking services at the moment. Also, if there’s a possibility, I’d like to request assistance with train travel for people with disabilities on the Sunday train from Cambridge to Birmingham New Street, for the same group of 7 people. User:Any updates on the restaurant booking and train arrangements? Agent:I am still in the process of retrieving the reservation details for the restaurant and verifying the accessible train options. I am retrieving the restaurant booking reference and exploring accessible train options now. Also, have you been able to find any accessible train options for Sunday from Cambridge to Birmingham New Street for 7 people? Agent:I’m sorry, but I couldn’t find specific accessible train options for that route at this moment. Additionally, would you like to receive the refund to your original payment method (gift card) or a different payment method? User:Honestly, it would have been nice to hear your thoughts on the impact of technology on pho- tography. Agent:I’m sorr