REAL METHOD of "REI-Bench: Can Embodied Agents Understand Vague Human Instructions in Task Planning?" (arXiv 2505.10872v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

CANEMBODIEDAGENTSUNDERSTAND VAGUEHUMANINSTRUCTIONS INTASKPLANNING? Chenxi Jiang Chuhao Zhou Jianfei Yang ∗ MARS Lab, School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Nanyang Technological University Singapore 639798 {chenxi003, chuhao002, jianfei.yang}@ntu.edu.sg Are all the ingredients ready? Then please move the heavy stuff / it outside. Vague Instructions One Step PlanSuccess State Context Memory Previous dialogue between human and robot Simulator The robot executes one step of the planner. We propose the REI-Bench framework that aims to study real-world HRI scenarios where coreferential vagueness exists in human instructions. To this end, we propose the first robot task planning benchmark that systematically models vague REs grounded in pragmatic theory (REI-Bench), where we discover that the vagueness of REs can severely degrade robot planning performance, leading to success rate drops of up to 36.9%. To mitigate the REs issue, we propose a simple yet effective approach: unlike traditional task planning methods (Hart et al., 1968; Aeronautiques et al., 1998; Chaslot et al., 2008), which are often constrained by specific environments and narrow task domains, LLMs enable robots to tackle tasks outside of conventional planning domains (Kim et al., 2024b; Zhou & Yang, 2025; Wu et al., 2024; An et al., 2024). As robots need context to understand REs in human instruction, we propose three levels of real-world contexts in multi-turn dialogues with irrelevant or missing information. Then we evaluate task planners based on the REI dataset, including 6 mainstream LLMs and 4 robot planning frameworks. We attempt to mitigate the issue using novel basic NLP methods, including aware prompt (AP) (Gao et al., 2024a), chain-of-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), and in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), but observe limited gains. Meanwhile, we find that these performance declines in LLMs occur primarily because they devote excessive attention to plan generation while failing to perform their inherent language understanding abilities. Inspired by our observation, we propose a simple yet effective approach, Task-Oriented Context Cognition (TOCC), which decouples task comprehension from the planning decision-making process. Rather than designing a fully fledged solution, we intend to draw attention from the research community to this overlooked challenge and thereby motivate deep exploration. To the best of our knowledge, this work provides the first systematic modeling of instruction vagueness in the context of robot task planning. Methods such as ProgPrompt (Singh et al., 2023) and LoTA-Bench (Choi et al., 2024) leverage datasets like VirtualHome (Puig et al., 2018) and AI2-THOR (Kolve et al., 2017). Linguistic Vagueness in LLMshas attracted attention among researchers in natural language processing (Liu et al., 2023a; Ortega-Mart´ın et al., 2023). However, these works lack a systematic definition of linguistic vagueness, a comprehensive evaluation of its impact on robotic performance, and effective methods to enhance the planner’s own understanding capability. For example, “Please bring me the mouse and keyboard” (referring to the computer input devices). The objective of our work is to comprehensively evaluate and analyze how different levels of coreferential vagueness from implicit REs affect the planner’s performance across diverse multi-turn dialogue contexts. The first three forms, known asexplicit REs, have only one potential corresponding object and can be directly understood. At the “Implicit REs” level, all explicit REs are replaced with implicit ones, except the 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 first one in context memory, forcing the planner to rely on scene information to identify the referred objects. In “Noised Context”, we introduce theAmbiguous Namenoise, defined as a character or brand with a name intentionally resembling that of an object in the simulator scene. As shown in Figure 2, context memory is generated (Step 1), processed into three types (Step 2), and further transformed to the REI-Bench through implicit REs replacement (Step 3). In step 1, we extend the context of seed instructions by prompting GPT-4o-mini with a template that consists of a context-expanded example and the text-based simulator scene description. The generated data consists of an instruction and a corresponding context memory. In step 2, we construct three types of context. The “standard context” retains the context memory generated in step 1 without further processing. To ensure natural adaptation, the LLM is given a brief background prompt for the name (e.g., “Rose is a family member.”). In Step 3, explicit REs are replaced with implicit ones following the rules outlined in Section 3.1. To ensure consistency in the number of explicit REs across tasks, we define a counting-based rule for each level of implicit REs and discard any data that violates the rule. Consequently, the REI-Bench consists of 2,700 examples spanning nine difficulty levels, defined by combinations of varying RE vagueness and 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Human: Comparison among different prompting methods, including aware prompt (AP), chain-of-thought (CoT), in-context learning (ICL), and our task-oriented context cognition (TOCC). To this end, we propose to inject explicit prompts into the LLM-based robot planners to alleviate the coreferential vagueness. (1) aware prompt (AP) (Gao et al., 2024a), which explicitly adds a prompt to guide the planner detect potential REs, (2) Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), which guides the planner to resolve REs step by step before planning, and (3) In-Context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), which provides examples of how to infer implicit REs from context. Meanwhile, both CoT and ICL substantially lengthen prompts, hindering language understanding during planning, particularly when onboard computing resources are limited and only a small language model is available. As shown in the bottom row of Figure 3, TOCC decouples the REs interpretation step from the planning process, avoiding the LLM from devoting excessive attention to planning within a single generation step. 4.3 ABLATIONSTUDY ONDIFFERENTPROMPTINGMETHODS We compare four prompting methods that can mitigate the impact of implicit REs for LLM-based task planners: Furthermore, CoT first guides the planner to autonomously analyse whether the instructions contain implicit REs and then