REAL METHOD of "Context Learning for Multi-Agent Discussion" (arXiv 2602.02350v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, we find that current MAD methods easily suffer from discussion inconsistency—LLMs fail to reach a coherent solution—due to the misalignment between their individual contexts. In this paper, we introduce a multi-LLM context learning method (M2CL) that learns a context generator for each agent, capable of dynamically generating context instructions per discussion round via automatic information organization and refinement. Specifically, inspired by our theoretical insights on the context instruction, M2CL trains the generators to control context coherence and output discrepancies via a carefully crafted self-adaptive mecha- nism. In a typical MAD framework, each LLM instance is pre-assigned a set of crafted contextsthat represent diverse solution perspectives of the problem to be solved. There are mistakes…The proof should first …, and then ... We first prove…, and then..., at last … Context: First prove the three sides are equal, then we can prove congruent... First prove the three sides are equal, then we can prove congruent... We first prove…, and then..., at last … Answer: An illustration of context misalignment of an existing method (Debate Du et al. Pre-assigned context instructions (in the blue and yellow boxes of the left part) provide insufficient guidance on information fusion, leading to conflict in reasoning. On one hand, the pre-assigned contexts or role-based instructions lack a nuanced understanding of the task; they are often rigid, incomplete or biased, which would misguide the reasoning of individual LLMs (Jang et al., 2025). To tackle these challenges, we propose amulti-LLM context learning( M2CL) method for efficient MAD, which learns a context generator for each agent, capable of dynamically generating context instructions per discussion round via automatic information organization and refinement. • We propose M2CL, a principled multi-LLM context learning method that learns a context generator for each agent, capable of dynamically generating context instructions per discussion round. • We systematically evaluate the proposed method across a range of challenging benchmarks and corroborate the efficacy and efficiency of the proposed method. Most existing methods remain constrained by manually defined inter-LLM topologies or workflows. Context learning.Context learning has recently attracted significant attention, as it allows LLMs to adjust their behavior at inference time by modifying the input context, without requiring any gradient-based training V on Oswald et al. (2024) query LLM to obtain knowledge and then query a retriever to obtain the final context. For the third component, in constrast to existing efforts relying on static preassigned roles, we employ an instruction generator G, parameterized by θi, to adaptively refine it into a per-step instruction I t i , conditioned on the task goal P , the initial instruction I b i , and the concatenated response ¯X t−1 i : First, we introduce the formulation of attention activation, denoted asa(·), as follows (Vaswani, 2017): 5 MULTI-LLM CONTEXTLEARNING In this section, we introduce a multi-LLM context learning method that can select appropriate contexts for each LLM and dynamically adapt the context according to the evolving task completion status. Thus, we introduce ∥a(C t i )−a(C t j)∥ into the objective to encourage LLMs to remain aligned with each other. (15) into a constrained optimization problem, where the context adjustment ∥I t i −I b i ∥ is treated as a constraint: Scaling our method reveals a more efficient scaling law as the performance grows logarithmically before saturation and improves faster than baselines. Context constraint.To answer the third question, we vary the context constraint β from 0 to 10 and run experiments across all datasets. The results show that the transferred contexts deliver consistent improvement, indicating that the trained context generator can directly adapt to a wide range of models without additional retraining. 7 LIMITATION ANDDISCUSSION In this paper, we propose a novel context learning method, designed to expand LLMs’ horizons and reach consensus in MAD. By initializing and adjusting LLMs’ contexts based on the problem and discussion states, our method significantly improves problem-solving capabilities across diverse benchmarks while maintaining computational efficiency. (24) D USEFULLEMMA Lemma D.1.Suppose ∥WV X∥ ≤LV and ∥(WKX) T WQX∥ ≤ρ2, the difference between the activation of softmax attentiona(X)and linear attentiona ′(X)can be bounded by: ∥D−1 exp(S)−S∥ =∥D−1 exp(S)−exp(S) + exp(S)−S∥ ≤∥D−1 exp(S)−exp(S)∥+∥exp(S)−S∥ ≤2nexp(2ρ 2) +nexp(ρ 2) ≤3nexp(2ρ 2)(30) Therefore, we derive the difference between the activation of softmax attention and linear attention as: Denote the activation of linear attention asa′, we can complete the proof by using Theorem D.2 to simplify the relationship of linear attention and Theorem D.1 to bound the difference: ⟨exp(S),1 n⟩= nX i=1 exp(Si)≥min i∈[n] exp(Si)≥min i∈[n] exp(−|Si|) = exp(−max i∈[n] |Si|) = exp(−∥S∥∞)≥exp(−∥S∥ 2)≥exp(−ρ)(37) E MULTI-ROUNDCONTEXTLEARNING First, we define: • GAIA (Mialon et al., 2024), a benchmark of real-world question answering tasks that integrate knowledge retrieval, reasoning, and multi-step tool use. F.2 BASELINES We test our method against six baselines. F.4 PSEUDOCODE OFM2CL We present the pseudocode of training M2CL in Algorithm 1. It begins with training the context initialization, then the context generators are trained along with the weight α during the discussion. 32 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 G.4 CONTEXTCONSTRAINT To assess the effect of context constraint, we carry out experiments by varying the context constraint β from 0 to 10. All the curves display the same trend of rising first and then falling, which is consistent with our theory. 22, it works well in all dataset and often converges in 60 training steps. This behavior demonstrates that our method effectively modulates context evolution to guide toward consensus without sacrificing initial creativity. You are instructed to rely on the dot product method, while noticing whether the geometric construction agent’s subtraction method yields a consistent pattern. Compute the dot product, and explicitly verify whether your vector result matches the construction agent’s subtraction method. Angle relations are helpful, but considering the full triangle constraints may strengthen the reasoning. Step-by- step deriv