REAL METHOD of "EXPO: Stable Reinforcement Learning with Expressive Policies" (arXiv 2507.07986v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

STABLEREINFORCEMENTLEARNING WITHEX- PRESSIVEPOLICIES Perry Dong Stanford University Qiyang Li UC Berkeley Dorsa Sadigh Stanford University Chelsea Finn Stanford University ABSTRACT We study the problem of training and fine-tuning expressive policies with online reinforcement learning (RL) given an offline dataset. We proposeEXpressivePolicyOptimization (EXPO), a sample-efficient online RL algorithm that utilizes an on-the-fly policy to maximize value with two parameterized policies – a larger expressive base policy trained with a stable imitation learning objective and a light-weight Gaussian edit policy that edits the actions sampled from the base policy toward a higher value distribution. Our approach yields up to 2-3x improvement in sample efficiency on average over prior methods both in the setting of fine-tuning a pretrained policy given offline data and in leveraging offline data to train online. Yet, existing online reinforcement learning methods are typically designed for simple Gaussian policies (Schulman et al., 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2018) and do not effectively leverage expressive pre-trained policies, such as diffusion or flow-matching policies (Chi et al., 2023) typically used in imitation learning. In the adjacent purely offline or purely online settings, many approaches have sought to avoid the gradient propagation instability by incorporating losses at intermediate denoising steps to guide the denoising process towards high-value actions (Psenka et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024), but it is still not obvious how to best perform stable value maximization for efficient online fine-tuning. Expressive Policy Optimization (EXPO)is a stable, sample efficient method for training expressive policies with reinforcement learning by avoiding direct optimization over the value function with the expressive policy.Right: learning objective and construct anon-the-flypolicy to maximize value through two steps — (1) a light-weight, one-step edit policy that refines the action samples from the base expressive policy, and (2) a non-parametric post-processing step that takes multiple action candidates from the base and edit policy and selects the highest-value action among base and edited actions. a base expressive policy that is initialized from offline pre-training and then online fine-tuned with anim- itation learningobjective, and a small Gaussian edit policy that is trained with standard policy loss in reinforcement learningto maximize the Q-value of the edited action. Our method is stable to train and unlike many prior works that focus on a particular class of policies (e.g., diffusion, flow-matching), our method is agnostic to policy parameterization and can fine-tune from any pre-trained policies. We evaluate our method on 12 tasks across 4 domains and find that our approach achieves strong performance in both online RL and offline-to-online RL setting with up to 2-3x improvement in sample efficiency on average. Another line of work focuses on pretraining a good value function or policy using pessimism or policy constraints typically employed in offline RL, followed by online fine-tuning (Hester et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021; Nair et al., 2021; Song et al., 2023; Nakamoto et al., 2024). Yet, other methods maintain separate polices for offline pretraining and online fine-tuning (Yang et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2023; Mark et al., 2023). While weighted BC is the most simple policy extraction method that can take into account Q-function signals, prior works (Fu et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024; 2025) have found other policy extraction methods often performs better. (2024) pre-train an expressive policy on the offline data and then learn a residual policy online to refine the actions from the base policy. (2024) reformulate the diffusion process as an augmented MDP on top of the original MDP and use policy-gradient methods (e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)) to train the policy. (2024) also uses an on-policy method to train the residual policy. (2025) tackles this by distilling the multi-step diffusion policy into less expressive two-step/single-step policy. (2024) use action gradients to provide a direct supervision on the training of the intermediate denoising steps to bias towards high-value actions. (2024) use action gradients as well but in a refinement manner where they first sample actions from the base policies and then improve these actions by hill climbing the Q-function using the action gradients. Our method draws on ideas from these prior works, but focuses on maximizing value in a stable way to address the problem of fine-tuning expressive policies. Lastly, we describe the implementation details required to make our method effective in practice. The full EXPO algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. 4.1 Q-VALUEMAXIMIZATION ANDEXPLORATION THROUGHACTIONEDITS To avoid the unstable explicit value maximization of expres- sive policies, we use an imitation learning objective to train the base policy, which has been shown to work stably and re- liable across a variety of expressive policy classes. We do so by training the edit policy πedit with a standard entropy-regularized policy loss: Taken together, theQ-function objective becomes min ϕ E(st,at,st+1)∼D[(rt +γQ ϕ′(st+1,˜a∗ t+1)−Q ϕ(st, at))2],where˜a ∗ t+1 ∼π OTF(·|st+1)(3) 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1Expressive Policy Optimization (EXPO) Require:Prior datasetD data ={(s i, ai)}; optionally, expressive policy initializationπ base. For these scenarios, we propose a framework for incorporating an entropy bonus into both the base and edit policy training. We instead construct a soft sampling distribution πsampling that first samples N actions ai from πbase and edits them into ˜ai+N =a i + ˆai for each action, and then chooses actions following the probability distribution πsampling(ai|s) = expβQ(s,a i)P k expβQ(s,a k). We train the edit policy with a simple Gaussian with entropy regularization as done in SAC, where the entropy promotes exploration in the implicitly parameterized policy even though the base expressive policy is trained with an imitation learning objective. (Q1)Can EXPO effectively leverage offline data for online sample-efficient RL? (Q2) How sample efficient is EXPO in fine-tuning pretrained policies compared to prior methods? (Q3)What components of EXPO are most important for performance? 5.1 BENCHMARKS We evaluate EXPO on 12 challenging continuous control tasks spanning vari