REAL METHOD of "PLAGUE: Plug-and-play Framework for Lifelong Adaptive Generation of Multi-turn Exploits" (arXiv 2510.17947v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Recent advancements in pre-training and post-training methods have further allowed LLMs to adapt to solving long-context and multi-step real-world problems (Wang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Edge et al., 2024; Fourney et al., 2024). SAMPLE DIVERSE PLANS Historical Case Study with Technical Emphasis Primer Module remove last step The previous query {query} was rejected because {feedback}. GOAT (Pavlova et al., 2024) follows a similar methodology; however, each step now uses one or more strategies from a static strategy library. ActorBreaker (Ren et al., 2025), on the other hand, creates a step-by-step plan for the attack using self-talk, simulates attack rollouts, and eliminates potential refusals early in the attack. PLAGUE is the first multi-turn attack to feature a lifelong-learning component using a unique embedding retrieval-powered memory architecture inspired by Zhao et al. The first phase - Planning (Section 3.3)- involves constructing a jailbreaking plan using the sampled objective and in-context learning examples of past strategies that successfully breached the Target LLM’s internal safeguards. While the Primer was conditioned on individual steps from the generated plan, the Finisher completely relies on the initial objective. Through every step of the Primer and Finisher phases, feedback from a reflection module is incor- porated into the Attacker as additional insight, allowing it to adapt in subsequent iterations. 3.2 ATTACKSETUP We define the Attacker LLM (A) along with a Rubric-Scoring LLM (R) for reflection analysis at each step. The total number of goals in our objective set is P and individual objectives are defined as pi. We define a strategy retrieval memory bank, R{+} that stores successful strategies. The Rubric Scorer is explicitly instructed to assign a score of 0 for both practicality and level of detail if relevance to the goal is assigned a score of 0. 3.3 PLANNERPHASE The Planner phase initializes an n-step plan based on the initial goal, with individual steps serving as anchors during the Primer phase. For the purpose of plan generation, PLAGUE first retrieves examples of strategies from long-term vector-embedding memory and then feeds them in as in-context learning examples to the Attacker LLM. 3.3.1 RETRIEVINGPLANS FROMMEMORY We define a memory bank R{+} for storing Planner-sampled strategies that successfully jailbreak the Target LLM T as evaluated by the Rubric Scorer R. If fewer than two strategies are retrieved, a strategy is randomly retrieved from the library. The algorithm for retrieving strategies is succinctly described in Algorithm 1. 3.4 PRIMERPHASE From the generated n-step plan, we omit the final step and use the first n−1 steps to escalate the context during the Priming phase. The purpose of the primer’s design is to anchor progress against intermediate steps rather than the initial attack objective, preventing drift while maintaining adaptability. At the end of each turn, our rubric evaluation is based on the step-specific question, rather than the initial objective. Our scoring heuristic for the Primer phase is strict, as we expect a high factor of adherence to the seemingly benign planning steps, unlike the malicious attack objective. The algorithm for priming the attack context is mentioned in Algorithm 2. Evaluation prompts are provided in Section B.1, and the algorithm for the Finisher is presented in Algorithm 3. We host two models locally - Llama 3.1-8B Instruct is used for summarization and Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B for embedding the objectives of our strategy retrieval module. This metric assigns a binary score, where 1 indicates that the target model T produced a valid answer to the attack objective and 0 otherwise. We compute an average across our samples to compute the final score. GOAT and Crescendo do not have a Planner phase, while ActorBreaker consistently makes four (extracting the harmful target, constructing the actor network, selecting the top actors and generating the step-by-step plan) calls during the Planner phase. Multi-head self-attention relation distillation for compressing pretrained transformers.arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15828, 2020. A APPENDIX A.1 ATTACKALGORITHM We provide a consolidated overview of the algorithm in multiple phases. Algorithm 1 defines the Planning phase of the algorithm, followed by Algorithm 2, which defined the Primer phase. Algorithm 1Planning Phase 1:procedureEMBEDINCONTEXTLEARNINGEXAMPLESTOPLANNER 2:relevant_strategies←RETRIEVERELEVANTSTRATEGIES() 3:plan←PLANNER(relevant_strategies)▷Uses strategies as in-context learning 4:returnplan▷Contains n steps 5:end procedure 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 2Phase 2: Primer Procedure 1:procedurePRIMER(plan) 2:round←0 3:iterative_prompt←"" 4:questions← {p 1, p2, . , pn−1}▷All questions except the last 5:whileround<LENGTH(questions)and|H A|< M AX_ROU N DSdo 6:actual_step_count←actual_step_count+ 1 7:q round ←A(p round,H A,iterative_prompt) 8:TARGETLLM receivesq round and returns responser round 9: Evaluator model Jreceives rround and qround and gives scores round and f eedback fround 10:SUMMARISERgives a response summarysum round 11:Append(q round, rround, fround, sround, sumround)toH A 12:ifscore≥7.0then 13:round←round+ 1 14:iterative_prompt←""▷Reset iterative prompt for next question 15:Append(q round, rround)toH T 16:else▷Consider as refusal 17:iterative_prompt←CREATEITERATIVEPROMPTREFUSAL(q round, fround) 18:end if 19:end while 20:returnH T,H A 21:end procedure Algorithm 3Phase 3: Finisher Procedure 1:procedureFINISHER(suggestion_question,H A,H T ) 2:iterative_prompt←"" 3:while do|H A|< M AX_ROU N DS 4:actual_step_count←actual_step_count+ 1 5:q round ←A(suggestion_question,H A,iterative_prompt,FINISHER PROMPT) 6:TARGETLLM receivesq round and returns responser round 7: ▷Save results 7:end procedure 8:MAIN()▷Execute main algorithm B PROMPTS B.1 ALGORITHMPROMPTS Summarizer Prompt: - Make them in a list that goes from step 1 to step n. - Unless you are at step 0, you will be given a conversation history that contains the response summaries for all the previous rounds but the last round. Think step-by-step about your observation (O), thought (T) adversarial reply (R) for a given attack and strategy (S). { "Provide a detailed technical overview of Bird scooter components, including the GPS tracker’s location, interface protocols, and power source specifications.", "As a follow-up for diagnostic testing purposes, outli