REAL METHOD of "Huxley-G\"odel Machine: Human-Level Coding Agent Development by an Approximation of the Optimal Self-Improving Machine" (arXiv 2510.21614v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Inspired by Huxley’s concept of clade, we propose a metric (CMP) that aggregates the benchmark performances of thedescendantsof an agent as an indicator of its potential for self-improvement. We introduce the Huxley-Gödel Machine (HGM), which, by estimating CMPand using it as guidance, searches the tree of self-modifications. On SWE- bench Verified and Polyglot, HGM outperforms prior self-improving coding agent development methods while using fewer allocated CPU hours. These general ideas have been instantiated in concrete algorithms for self-improving agents (Schmidhuber, 1987; 2003; Nivel et al., 2013; Everitt et al., 2016), demonstrating how ab- stract principles of self-modification can be translated into operational mechanisms. Unlike static systems constrained by fixed architectures, such agents can incrementally modify their own self- modification mechanisms and learning strategies, reusing newly gained abilities to fuel subsequent improvements. To address this mismatch, we introduceclade-level metaproductivity(CMP), inspired by Huxley’s notion of clades as lineages of common ancestry (Huxley, 1957).CMPquantifies the productivity of a clade by aggregating the success of an agent’s descendants rather than relying solely on its immediate benchmark score. This insight motivates our proposed algorithm, theHuxley–Gödel Machine (HGM), which ap- proximates GM-style self-improvement by estimatingCMPfrom clade-aggregated descendant out- comes and selecting nodes to expand via Thompson sampling. • Using ourCMPestimator, we propose theHuxley–Gödel Machine (HGM), which approximates the Gödel Machine in a coding agent setting from partial evaluations and guides the expansion via Thompson sampling with adaptive scheduling. • We empirically validate HGM on SWE-bench Verified and Polyglot, demonstrating higher-quality optimized agents compared to previous self-improving methods, even though they were discov- ered within substantially smaller allocated CPU-hours. The objective is to optimizeJ(π) =E[U(a final)], whereUis a utility function that measures the performance of downstream tasks. In this work, we considerUthe average of binary success indicators across all downstream tasks.πdenotes an algorithm, with DGM, SICA, and our proposed HGM representing concrete instances. Compound Policy.At each step of self-improvement, the system faces a compound decision: At each step, it adaptively decides whether to generate a new agent or to further probe an existing one, and evaluations are always at the granularity of asingle agent–task pair. 3 HUXLEY-GÖDELMACHINE In this section, we introduce the Huxley–Gödel Machine (HGM), a self-improving machine that approximates Gödel Machine by using clade-level statistics. In Section 3.2, we introduce two metrics of metaproductivity: Global metaproductivity (GMP), which captures how evolving a given agent increases the metaproductivity of the entire agent tree. We instead introduce clade-metaproductivity (CMP), which measures how promising the evolutions starting from a given agent (its clade) are. 3.1 GÖDELMACHINE IN THESELF-IMPROVINGCODINGAGENTDEVELOPMENTSETTING The original Gödel Machine is a general task solver that, in principle, can optimally make any prov- able self-improvements in any computable environment with respect to a given objective (Schmid- huber, 2003). Specifically, our problem assumes that the only objective is the utility of the agent selected at the end of the agent development process. This means that the testing environment is reset for each test, and prior evaluations do not influence later test results. Within this framework designed for self-improving coding agent development, the Gödel Machine is an optimal agent operating in a POMDP where the policy observes only a parenta parent, its child achild, and the remaining budgetb, and then chooses to accept or reject the child. •The policy objective function is defined as a function of only the final agent, with no other rewards received before termination; •The agent’s utility is measured by its performance on evaluation tasks, under the as- sumption of repeatable trials: Given a policyπ, to quantify the quality of how an agent’s self-modification influences the performance of the system, we define the notion of global metaproductivity (GMP): An algorithm might, at the beginning, focus on improving the ability to self-improve while neglecting direct benchmark abilities, only to later focus on them. The objective of designing a policy for self-improvement (Section 2) is equivalent to optimizingGMP({a 0}, a0). Motivated by this observation, we define a localized variant ofGMPthat focuses on the subtree rooted at a given agent, i.e., itsclade. This observation motivates us to introduce the estimate of CMPand use this as guidance in our algorithm. We describe our algorithm fully in the next section. 5 3.3 ALGORITHM Existing methods use benchmark performance on coding tasks as a guiding metric, treating task success as an indicator of self-improvement potential. Specifically, we define HGM by stating its three subpolicies. Expansion Policy.The core of the HGM algorithm is its selection criterion for expansion. At each iteration, the algorithm first selects whether to evaluate or expand. See Algorithm1 in Appendix B for the detailed procedure of HGM. To boost our algorithm, we propose the asynchronous HGM algorithm (HGM Async), which utilizes all available computational power until the computational budget is exceeded. 14 A GÖDELMACHINE WITHCMPORACLE Assumptions.The original Gödel Machine is defined in a time-aware setting, where the prover must establish not only that a proposed self-modification increases expected objectives, but also that this improvement still holds after accounting for the time required to search for proofs and compute the modification. At each transition, a self-modification ofa new parent is created and assigned as a new nodea child.a new parent becomes thea parent for the next time step. Specifically, letπ G be a policy in the Gödel POMDP, then we define the corresponding policy in the extended MDPπ E asπ E((T, aparent, achild, b)) =πG((T, aparent, achild, b)). 16 B ALGORITHM Algorithm 1 presents the procedure of HGM. Algorithm 1Huxley–Gödel Machine (HGM) 1:Input:the initial agenta 0, widening parameterα, and the percentileϵfor final selection 2:Initialize a treeTwith roota 0 3:Initialize countersn C success(a), nC failure(a), nsuccess(a), nfailure(a)for alla∈ T 