REAL METHOD of "Gradient Descent with Large Step Sizes: Chaos and Fractal Convergence Region" (arXiv 2509.25351v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

CHAOS ANDFRACTALCONVERGENCEREGION Shuang Liang UCLA liangshuang@g.ucla.edu Guido Montúfar UCLA & MPI MiS montufar@math.ucla.edu ABSTRACT We examine gradient descent in matrix factorization and show that under large step sizes the parameter space develops a fractal structure. We derive the exact critical step size for convergence in scalar-vector factorization and show that near criticality the selected minimizer depends sensitively on the initialization. Our findings reveal that near-critical step sizes induce a chaotic regime of gradient descent where the training outcome is unpredictable and there are no simple implicit biases, such as towards balancedness, minimum norm, or flatness. The step size, or learning rate, is a critical factor determining the dynamics and convergence of gradient descent optimization. Given an initial parameter, what is the critical (largest) step size that allows convergence? What kind of implicit biases are induced by gradient descent with near-critical step size? Addressing these questions is challenging, since large step sizes can produce highly complex, non- monotonic, and even chaotic trajectories. To our knowledge, beyond the univariate training loss setting studied by Kong and Tao (2020); Chen et al. Overall, our results imply that near-critical step sizes place gradient descent in a chaotic regime where the training outcome is unpredictable: 1.2 Related Work Gradient Descent Dynamics Under Large Step SizesA main line of research on large-step-size gradient descent focuses on the non-monotonic convergence of the loss and its impact on the final model. Another line of work shows how a large step size can enhance feature learning in one step of gradient descent (Ba et al., 2022; Dandi et al., 2024; Moniri et al., 2025), also comparing different parametrizations (Sonthalia et al., 2025). Similar observations about the role of the step size in feature learning have also been made for SGD (Andriushchenko et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024) and pre-training (Sadrtdinov et al., 2024). Cr˘aciun and Ghoshdastidar (2024) proved the existence of a step size threshold above which the algorithm diverges. They showed the emergence ofLi-Yorke chaos, i.e., the existence of periodic orbits of arbitrary periods, for univariate training losses. The objective then becomes ˜L( ˜U ,˜V) = 1 2 ∥ ˜U ⊤ ˜V−Σ Y ∥2 F + λ 2 (∥ ˜U∥ 2 F +∥ ˜V∥ 2 F ), where the target is diagonal. Compared to these, our analysis extends to the full spectrum of step sizes, rather than restricting to bounded step sizes. In the following result, we characterize the critical step size for problem (2) and the emergence of chaos under critical step sizes. • Critical Step Size:For almost all initializations (¯u,¯v)∈R2d, the algorithm converges to a global minimizer if η < η∗(¯u,¯v)and fails to converge to any minimizer if η > η∗(¯u,¯v), where the critical step size is given by (wheny= 0, we adopt the convention1/0 = +∞): The critical step size (3) consists of two terms. If η <8/(4λ+Q(¯u,¯v)), then gradient descent converges to a global minimizer; If η <4/(4λ+ Q(¯u,¯v)), then the particular minimizer it converges to isp−(¯u,¯v). In particular, theimbalance u2 −v 2, which is known to be (approximately) preserved under gradient descent with small step sizes (Du et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019), fails dramatically under large step sizes. Consider a loss function L(θ) = Pm j=1 ℓ(fθ(xj), yj) with polynomial loss ℓ and training data (xj, yj)m j=1. In Figure 4 we consider the mean squared error and report how the step size affects the norm and sharpness of the parameter that is returned at the end of training. At large step sizes, the final norm and final sharpness are sensitive to step size. Chaos and Fractal Convergence Region Future DirectionsWe showed that at large step sizes there may not exist any simple algorithmic biases, but observed that biases could still be studied in a distribution sense. How two-layer neural networks learn, one (giant) step at a time.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(349):1–65. A theory of non-linear feature learning with one gradient step in two-layer neural networks. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods.Ussr computational mathematics and mathematical physics, 4(5):1–17. spikes in the training loss and their impact on generalization through feature learning. The key idea is to first analyze the quotient dynamical system introduced in Appendix D, and then translate the conclusions back to the original gradient descent system. We first show that when the step size is small enough, the quotient dynamicsFis predictable. If W∩ {u=±v} ̸=∅, then, without loss of generality, assume W=B((u 0, u0), δ). Then according to Proposition 26 for the regularized case and Proposition 21 for the unregularized case, in any neighborhood O of 39 Gradient Descent with Large Step Sizes: If η <mini=1,···,d y 8/(4λ+Q(¯ui,¯vi)), then gradient descent converges to a global minimizer; If η <mini=1,···,d y 4/(4λ+Q(¯ui,¯vi)), then for alli,(u i t, vi t)converges top −(ui 0, vi 0). Moreover, if the initialization ( ¯U ,¯V)∈ W , then for i= 1,· · ·, r, the trajectory of the columns (ui, vi) is identical to the trajectory of gradient descent applied to the scalar factorization problem Li(u, v) = 1 2 (u⊤v−y i)2 + λ 2 (∥u∥2 2 +∥v∥ 2 2), with step sizeηand initialization(¯u i,¯vi). We then ran gradient descent with step size 1 for 1000 iterations. The training stops if the loss is belowLmin + 10−6, where Lmin is the global minimum or if it is above 100. We therefore recorded the final loss value and used the “contour” function from the Matplotlib package (version 3.5.2) to collect points in the level set of 0 for the loss. To justify this procedure, note, as shown in Proposition 15, any point outside D′ η either converges to a minimizer within finite steps or diverges. The training stops if the loss value is below10 −8 or above100. We then computed the number of boxes N(ϵ) needed to cover all the points, with the box width ε ranging from 1/22 to 1/28. We trained a neural networks with two hidden layers, each with 100 neurons, for 5000 epochs. For mean-squared error, the training stops if the training loss is below 10−6 or is above 104; For cross-entropy, the training stops if the training loss is below 10−2 or is above 104. We trained a neural networks with two hidden layers, each with 25 neurons, for 3000 epochs under mean squared error. The training stops if the training loss is 