REAL METHOD of "Variational Deep Learning via Implicit Regularization" (arXiv 2505.20235v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This not only narrows the gap to how standard neural networks are trained, but also reduces the computational overhead of training compared to varia- tional inference. More specifically, we propose to learn a variational distribution over the weights of a deep neural network by maximizing the expected log-likelihood in analogy to training via max- imum likelihood in the standard case. Surprisingly, we show theoretically and empirically that training this way does not cause uncertainty to collapse away from the training data, if initialized and parametrized correctly. 2 B ACKGROUND Given a training dataset (X, y) = {(xn, yn)}N n=1 of input-output pairs, supervised learning seeks a function fw(x) to predict the corresponding outputy(x) for a test input x. w⋆ ∈ arg min w ℓr(w) with ℓr(w) = ℓ(y, fw(X)) + λr(w), (1) where the loss ℓ(y, fw(X)) encourages fitting the training data and the regularizer r(w), given some λ >0, discourages overfitting, which can lead to poor generalization on test data. Implicit Bias of Optimization One remarkable observation in deep learning is that training over- parametrized neural networks ( P > N) with gradient descent without explicit regularization can nonetheless lead to effective (in-distribution) generalization, despite there being many global min- ima of the loss corresponding to functions fw which achieve zero training error [21]. However, rather than approximating the Bayesian posterior, which trades off training error against an explicit, a priori preference for certain models, we enforce that all models have zero training error while using implicit regularization to weight them. 3.1 T RAINING VIA THE EXPECTED LOSS We propose to train a variational neural network defined by an architecture fw and a variational distribution over weights qθ(w) by minimizing the expected loss ¯ℓ(θ) in analogy to how deep neural networks are usually trained. (4) At first glance removing the divergence term from the variational objective in Eq. (3) seems prob- lematic because the new objective is clearly minimized when the variational distribution is a point mass at the minimum loss solution, i.e. The key to understanding our approach is that, in the overparameterized setting, a point mass is only one of many optima corresponding to distributions qθ⋆ (w), and it is the implicit bias of the optimiza- tion procedure that chooses among them. As we will see, if one trains an overparametrized linear model via the expected loss using (stochastic) gradient descent, this implicit bias can be explicitly characterized to depend on the initialization. 3.2 I MPLICIT BIAS OF SGD AS GENERALIZED VARIATIONAL INFERENCE Assume we train an overparametrized linear model with a Gaussian variational family via the ex- pected loss. For an appropriate learning rate sequence, (stochastic) gradient descent converges to a global minimum θGD ⋆ ∈ arg min ¯ℓ(θ) of the training objective. We therefore call our method Implicit Bias Variational Inference (IBVI). 3.3 C OMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY In practice, we minibatch the expected loss both over training data and parameter sampleswm drawn from the variational distribution qθ(w) such that ¯ℓ(θ) = Eqθ (w)(ℓ(y, fw(X))) ≈ 1 NbM PNb n=1 PM m=1 ℓ(yn, fwm(xn)). The number of parameter samples M we draw for each evaluation of the objective, and the variational family, which determines the number of additional parameters of the model and the cost for sampling a set of parameters in each forward pass. Training with a single parameter sample given a small enough learning rate. Training With A Single Parameter Sample (M = 1) When drawing fewer parameter samples wm the training objective in Eq. When using fewer parameter samples in the expected loss, training is unstable unless the learning rate is cho- sen sufficiently small. For a fixed number of optimizer steps this decreases performance, but either training for more steps, or us- ing momentum closes this gap. As we show in Section 4, training an overparametrized linear model with SGD via the expected loss amounts to generalized variational inference if the covariance is factorized , i.e. Throughout our experiments we use Gaussian layers with factorized covariances for all architectures. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2−7 2−5 2−3 2−1 Learning Rate 1.5 2.0 Train Loss Standard Param. When training deep neural networks, it is not unusual to use layer-specific learning rates. Given our interpretation of training via the expected loss as generalized variational inference with a prior implied by the parametrization and initialization, a natural question is whether we can extend µP to the variational setting and thus inherit its inductive bias. At any point during training, the ith hidden unit in layer l is a function of four random variables: Since the Siz term is a sum over R terms, where R is the rank of S ∈ RP ×R, applying the central limit theorem we propose scaling this term by R−1/2 and then applying µP to the mean and covariance parameters. We train two-hidden-layer MLPs on CIFAR10, using a low rank covariance in the final two layers. Under standard parametrization (left panel), the learning rate that results in the smallest training loss decreases with hidden size. Structure in the variational parameters has always played an important role for computational reasons [38, 46, 47] and often only a few layers are treated probabilistically [39], with some methods only considering the last layer, effectively treating the neural network as a feature extractor [48, 49]. Var qθ (fw(xn)) = 0 } consists of mean parameters which, if projected onto the training data, are equivalent to theL2 max margin vector and covariance parameters such that there is no uncertainty at training data. 7 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 to the regression case, where zero training loss enforces interpolation of the training data. We use convolutional architectures (LeNet5 [70] or ResNet34 [71]), which, for all datasets but MNIST, are initialized with pretrained weights except for the input and output layer. As described in Section 3.3, for IBVI we train with a single sample only and a probabilistic input and output layer with low-rank covariance, reducing the memory overhead compared to a standard neural network to as little as≈ 10% with similar training time (see Figure 4). Parameters CIFAR100 MNISTCIFAR10CIFAR100TinyImageNet 0 2h 4hTraining Runtime Method Standard Temperature Scaling Laplace (Last-layer, GS