REAL METHOD of "SK2Decompile: LLM-based Two-Phase Binary Decompilation from Skeleton to Skin" (arXiv 2509.22114v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To mitigate this, we introduceSK 2Decompile, a novel two-phase approach to decompile from the skeleton (semantic structure) to the skin (identi- fier) of programs. Specifically, we first apply a Structure Recovery model to trans- late a program’s binary code to an Intermediate Representation (IR) as deriving the program’s “skeleton”, i.e., preserving control flow and data structures while ob- fuscating all identifiers with generic placeholders. We train the Identifier Naming model with a separate reinforcement learning objective that rewards the semantic similar- ity between its predictions and the reference code. To mitigate this, we introduceSK 2Decompile, a novel LLM- based decompilation technique that decomposes the binary decompilation task into two phases. In particular, we first derive the program’s skeleton, i.e., its core structure, including control flow and data structure (Aho et al., 2007). Then, we derive the program’s skin, i.e., the meaningful type, variable, and function names reflecting the actual program semantics (Lacomis et al., 2019). In particular, we design a novel Intermediate Representation (IR) acting as the “skeleton” of the program. The decompilation process is then split into two sequential phases:Structure Recoverywhere an LLM translates the compiled binary code to our structural IR andIdentifier Namingwhere a second LLM enriches the IR by predicting meaningful names reflecting actual program semantics for all placeholders. For Structure Recovery, we first train a sequence-to-sequence model (Cummins et al., 2024; Vaswani et al., 2017) and further tune it with reinforcement learning (RL) (OpenAI, 2023), where the compiler checks the syntax and semantics to provide the reward. To our best knowledge,SK 2Decompileis the first to approach the average re-executability rate of∼70% on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) and∼60% on MBPP (Austin et al., 2021). •Two-phase Decompilation Framework.We propose the first decompilation framework con- sisting of two phases: Each phase trains a model using reinforcement learning with specific rewards respectively. •Intermediate Representation (IR).We propose our IR as the obfuscated source code. Recently, D-LIFT (Zou et al., 2025) enhanced the training pipeline by incorporating rein- forcement learning, guided by a novel reward function D-SCORE which provides a multi-faceted assessment of code based on accuracy and readability. For each model, a supervised fine-tuning (SFT) process is performed followed by Reinforcement Learning (RL) with its respective reward. In particular, the goal of decompila- tion is to find the most probable source code (s) given a low-level representation, i.e., the pseudocode (u) in our paper. First, we solve the complex Structure Recovery challenge (P(i|u)), and then perform the Identifier Naming task on a clean, abstract representation (P(s|i)). Accordingly, the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle formalizes this trade-off through the objective: Such a repre- sentation emerges naturally from the IB objectives. In particular, for the compression objective, the model should distill high-level structural abstractions from the noisy, low-level patterns of the input pseudocode. Meanwhile, for the relevance objective, the obfuscated code is an ideal structural representation as it can be theoretically recoverable from compiled binary code even when the semantics embodied in original identifiers is lost during compilation. Algorithm 1Generation of Intermediate Representation (IR) Require:Source codeC, corresponding pseudocodeP Ensure:Obfuscated source code (IR) 1:AnalyzePto extract names that need to be preserved:F P 2:ParseCinto an abstract syntax tree (AST):T 3:Initialize rename mapsR[·]← ∅forfunc,type,field,var 4:Initialize counterscnt[·]←1for each identifier type 5:Initialize replacement listL ← ∅ 6:Traverse(node): 7:(id type, name)←classifynode 8:ifname /∈F P then 9:ifname /∈R[id type]then 10:new←id type∥cnt[id type] 11:R[id type][name]←new 12:cnt[id type]←cnt[id type] + 1 13:end if 14:Append replacement(start(node), end(node), R[id type][name])toL 15:end if 16:for eachchildcofnodedo 17:Traverse(c) 18:end for 19:Obfuscate(C,L): 20:SortLby start position in descending order 21:LetIRbe a mutable copy ofC 22:for each(s, e, new)inLdo 23:Replace substringIR[s:e]withnew 24:end for 25:returnIR 26:returnIR 3.4 IR GENERATION Algorithm 1 illustrates the process of generating the obfuscated code (IR) from the source code. Specifically, the pseudocode is first analyzed to extract all function and type names that should remain unchanged in the obfuscated code, e.g., the standard typeintand library functionmemcpy, which are stored in the reserved listF P (line 1). The source code is then parsed into an abstract syntax tree (AST) to provide precise identifier positions (line 2). For each identifier category, we initialize renaming maps and counters, as well as an empty replacement list (lines 3–5). We then invoke the recursive procedure TRAVERSEon the root of the AST (lines 6-18). A replacement entry containing the start and end offsets together with the new 5 preprint name is then appended to the replacement list (line 14). The procedure continues recursively on all children of the current node (lines 16-18). This paradigm typically minimizes the cross-entropy (CE) loss for the predicted tokens:y i:LCE(θ) = − PN i=1 logP θ(yi |y <i, x), i.e., calculating the total loss by summing the negative log probabilities of the model correctly predicting each token in a sequence, given all the preceding tokens. Such CE loss refers to an aggregation of local, token-level prediction errors, serving as a baseline to train an LLM-based decompiler. However, it lacks syntactic and semantic awareness, including assigning equal penalties for unequal errors. To further enhance Structure Recovery, after the S2S training, we perform reinforcement learning (RL) to align the outputs with compiler’s preference and type constraints such that the generated IR could better represent a compilable and functionally sound program. Specifically, we design the reward made up of two components. First, for each generated IR, we provide the compiler with the header of the ground-truth IR in order to verify its compilability and grant a reward only upon success, for advancing functional correctness. Similarly, for Identifier Naming, the CE loss undesirably penalizes cases where identifiers differ superficially but are semantically equivalent, wh