REAL METHOD of "Learning To Draft: Adaptive Speculative Decoding with Reinforcement Learning" (arXiv 2603.01639v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address these limitations, we introduce Learning to Draft (LTD), a novel method that directly optimizes for throughput of each draft-and-verify cycle. While some works have attempted to dynamically adjust the size of the draft tree (Brown et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024c; Huo et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025a), their approaches typically rely on simple heuristics or train models to optimize for the metric of acceptance length—the average number of tokens guessed correctly per verification step. Based the idea above, we propose LTD (learning to draft), a novel method that synergistically optimizes both phases by using throughput as the direct optimization objective. We build our method upon the state-of-the-art Eagle3 framework, training our policies to replace its static heuristics with a dynamic, context-aware decision-making process. As demonstrated through extensive evaluations under five distinct LLMs across four benchmarks, our method achieves significant performance gains. During greedy decoding, our method yields substantial throughput improvements over the highly optimized Eagle3 baseline: Notably, our approach demonstrates robustness in high-temperature scenarios, delivering an approximate 5% throughput gain where most other dynamic speculative methods become ineffective. By maximizing throughput of each draft- and-verify cycle as a direct reward, our method learns to manage the trade-off between acceptance length and time cost. Instead of treating the drafting and verification phases as indepen- dent problems, we propose a jointly trained, co-adaptive policy framework where two policies learn to dynamically coordinate to each phase. Our method achieves significant performance gains (up to 36.4%) over strong Eagle3 baseline in greedy decoding. By incorporat- ing a tree attention mechanism, this method facilitates the parallel verification of multiple candidate sequences, establishing a highly efficient paradigm that has since been widely adopted (Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). 2.2 ADAPTIVEADJUSTMENTS FORSPECULATIVEDECODING While tree-based verification significantly enhances throughput, most methods adopt a static schedule for each draft-and-verify cycle (Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a), failing to dynamically adapt to the varying complexities of input contexts. In this first step, the draft model performs a forward pass to generate a probability distribution over the subsequent tokens, and the top-W most probable candidate tokens are selected to form the first level of leaf nodes in the tree. These V selected tokens are then flattened into a single sequence, along with a corresponding tree attention mask, is passed to the target model. At the position of this first error, target model discards the remainder of the candidate tokens, computes the correct token, and appends it to the sequence of accepted tokens. These policies are jointly optimized using the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm (Schul- man et al., 2017) to maximize a reward signal,R t, which represents the throughput for each cycle: To ensure stable convergence, we employ a two-stage training procedure. The first stage involves training the initial depth and size policies independently. Initial Policy Training.We leverage the HumanEval dataset (Chen et al., 2021) for training, as its diverse and complex code snippets provide a rich environment for the policies to develop a wide range of adaptive strategies. Specifically, the size policy,πV , is trained for 100k steps with draft depths randomly sampled from the range [1,12] . Conversely, the depth policy, πD, is trained for 1M steps using a constant verification size of 60, mirroring the heuristic used in the Eagle3 baseline. As illustrated in the figure, the number of training steps was sufficient to ensure model convergence. To address this co-adaptation challenge, we introduce an iterative optimization procedure. Implementation DetailsWe implement the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm us- ing the Stable-Baselines3 library (Raffin et al., 2021) and train our policies on the HumanEval dataset (Chen et al., 2021). The size and depth policies are trained for 100k and 1M steps, respec- tively. Further analysis regarding the choice of training steps can be found in the Appendix C.1. We apply our methods to current SOTA Speculative Decoding method Eagle3 and compare with recent representative dynamic depth methods, including DDD (Brown et al., 2024), SVIP (Zhang et al., 2024c), Gammatune (Gautam et al., 2025), Disco (Mamou et al., 2024) and SpecDec++ (Huang et al., 2025a) and dynamic size methods C2T (Huo et al., 2025). We set the default parameters for dynamic depth methods with a verification size 60 and a maximum depth of 12, dynamic size methods with a depth of 8. 5.2 EFFECTIVENESS The performance of our method is detailed in Table 1 and Table 5. Our method accelerates inference by an average of 6.5% on Llama-3 and 5.1% on Vicuna compared to the default Eagle3 configuration. In long thinking model like Deepseek-R1-Distll-LLaMA 8B, our method can yield 10% accelerate, which is quite useful as the long generation time for these models. Notably, our method maintains the highest average speedup at a temperature of 1.0 as shown in Table 5, despite being trained exclusively at greedy decoding. This outcome highlights that our method’s strength lies not just in reducing the size of draft trees, but in strategically allocating candidate tokens to contexts where they are most likely to be accepted, which validate the efficacy of our approach. REPRODUCIBILITYSTATEMENT In Section 4 and Appendix A.2, we provide a detailed description of our method and the training process; in Section 5.1 and Appendix A.3, we present the complete training parameters and evaluation datasets; and in Appendix A.1, we document the hyperparameters used for baseline methods. 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A DETAILEDSETTINGS A.1 BASELINESSETTINGS Table 3 summarizes the key difference between our methods and various dynamic draft tree methods. • Architecture:Both the policy and value networks are implemented as two-layer feed- forward networks (FFNs) with hidden layer dimensions of [1024, 256]. • Training Strategy:To establish a stable training curriculum, we first trained an initial depth policy against a fixed verification size of V= 60 tokens, which mirrors the heuristic used in the Eagle3 baseline. First, compared to approaches that rely on