REAL METHOD of "Distributionally Robust Linear Regression with Block Lewis Weights" (arXiv 2607.00252v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our algorithm improves over known interior point methods for moderate accuracy regimes and matches the state-of-the-art guarantees for the special case ofℓ∞ regression. We also give algorithms that smoothly interpolate between minimizing the average least squares loss and the distributionally robust loss. 13 3 Block Lewis Weights and their Properties 14 4 Mirror Descent with Inexact Updates 17 5 Optimal MS Acceleration under Custom Euclidean Geometry 20 6 Minimizing the Distributionally Robust Loss 25 6.1 Smoothly Approximating the Objective . 32 7 Interpolating Between Average and Robust Losses 35 7.1 Calculus for the objective . 62 2 1 Introduction Machine learning algorithms and their training datasets have grown substantially in both size and complexity over the past decade. (1.2) Objective 1.2 is the “fairest” objective among all objectives that balance utility and distributional robustness [KLMR18; CR18; ANSS22; CGSB22; RVFRWYT19; GNPS24]. Since problem 1.2 is a min-max optimization objective, it is also natural to try to use game theory-inspired approaches that use some oracle (such as gradients) for each group as a black box. For instance, we can cast objective 1.2 as a repeated game between a min player (equippedwithano-regretalgorithm)andamaxplayer(equippedwiththebestresponseoracle). Anothernaturalapproach (thatcanpartiallyaddresstheprevioustwoissues),followingthediscussionbyBoydandVanden- berghe [BV04, Section 6.4], is to rewrite problem 1.2 in its epigraph form and use an interior point method (IPM) to solve the resulting problem (which, in this case, is a quadratically constrained linear program). Thenewobjectivevaluedoesnotchangefromtheoriginalobjectivevalue,butthe iteration complexity from the IPM now blows up to √ 𝑚𝑘. 1.1 Our Results In this paper, we present a new algorithm (Algorithm 1) to approximately optimize objective 1.2, whichaddressestheaforementioneddifficulties. Then Algorithm 1 returnsb𝒙 such that, max 𝑖∈[𝑚] 1√𝑛𝑖 ∥A𝑆𝑖b𝒙− 𝒃𝑆𝑖∥2≤( 1+𝜀)· min 𝒙∈R𝑑 max 𝑖∈[𝑚] 1√𝑛𝑖 ∥A𝑆𝑖 𝒙− 𝒃𝑆𝑖∥2 , (1.3) and it runs in 𝑂 ©­­­­ « min{rank(A),𝑚}1/3  log  𝑛 log𝑚 𝜀  14/3 + log(𝑚)  𝜀2/3 ª®®®® ¬ linear-system-solvesinmatricesoftheform A⊤BA,where Bisablock-diagonalmatrixforwhichblock 𝑖 has size𝑛𝑖×𝑛𝑖. The complexities of algorithms for optimizing (1.2) or for the special case ofℓ∞ regres- sion, assuming OPT = 1 (the first three guarantees are additive approximations) and ignoring polylog(𝑛,𝑚)terms. We stress that we include the references toℓ∞ regression only to show that our algorithm is no worse than that of [JLS22] in this special case of 𝑛𝑖 = 1 for all𝑖, and none of their algorithms apply to our general setting. First, this is typically how second-order algorithms are compared, such as interior point methods for linear programming [LS19]. Wealsostudythefollowingfamily of objectives that interpolate between objectives 1.1 and 1.2 for different values of𝑝≥ 2, min 𝒙∈R𝑑 1 𝑚 Õ 𝑖∈[𝑚]  1 𝑛𝑖 ∥A𝑆𝑖 𝒙− 𝒃𝑆𝑖∥2 2 𝑝/2 . (1.4) In particular, note that choosing𝑝 = 2 in the above objective gives us the average least-squares probleminobjective1.1,while 𝑝→∞ recoversobjective1.2. Tothisend,wegiveAlgorithm5toapproximately optimize objective 1.4 and prove the following guarantee about its iteration complexity. Then Algorithm 5 returnsb𝒙 such that, 𝑚Õ 𝑖=1  1√𝑛𝑖 ∥A𝑆𝑖b𝒙− 𝒃𝑆𝑖∥2 𝑝! 1/𝑝 ≤( 1+𝜀)· min 𝒙∈R𝑑 𝑚Õ 𝑖=1  1√𝑛𝑖 ∥A𝑆𝑖 𝒙− 𝒃𝑆𝑖∥2 𝑝! 1/𝑝 (1.5) and runs in 𝑂 𝑝𝑂(1) min{rank(A),𝑚} 𝑝−2 3𝑝−2 log 𝑝𝑑 𝜀  3! linear-system-solvesinmatricesoftheform A⊤BA,where Bisablock-diagonalmatrixforwhichblock 𝑖 has size𝑛𝑖×𝑛𝑖. Inparticular,thismeansthatminimizingtheinterpolatingobjective (1.4)alsominimizestherobustobjective (1.2) (up to numerical constants) and vice versa. This limitation motivates the study of multi-objective optimization problems [Mie99; Ehr05],whereeachagent 𝑚 hasadistribution 𝒟𝑚 thatdefinesitsobjectiveas E𝑧∼𝒟𝑚[𝑓(𝒙𝑚;𝑧)],and where models𝒙𝑚 can vary across agents—a framework known as personalization. One of the earliest algorithms for such problems was introduced by Blum, Haghtalab, Procaccia, and Qiao [BHPQ17], where each agent’s objective must be minimized to a pre-specified threshold 𝜖 with high probability, framed within a PAC learning framework [Val84; Vap13]. We view the current work as a first step towards this goal, as the objective (1.2) is a structured convex quadratic program for which we get an iteration complexity independent of𝑚. Finally, our results suggest that optimizing for “ℓ𝑝-interpolants” between non-robust and robust objectives may be computationally easier than optimizing for the robust objective alone. Sub-routineslike(2.1)arecentraltomanytrust-regionmethods[CGT00;NW06],and,importantly when 𝑓 isthesumofalinearfunctionandaself-concordantbarrier,interiorpointmethodsderived from the self-concordant barrier framework* [NN94]. We therefore first need to find some surrogate objectivee𝑓 so that: 9 To smoothen𝑓(𝒙), we use the family of objectives parameterized by𝛽,𝛿 e𝑓𝛽,𝛿(𝒙) B 𝛽 log ©­­ « 𝑚Õ 𝑖=1 exp ©­­ « q 𝛿2+∥A𝑆𝑖 𝒙− 𝒃𝑆𝑖∥2 2−𝛿 𝛽 ª®® ¬ ª®® ¬ . However, we go a step further and show how to obtain approximate stationary points to (2.3) instead of just getting a small objective value. 2.3 The Geometry of the Proximal Subproblems and Block Lewis Weights Atthispoint,wehavethetoolsweneedtogetratesoftheform 𝑂  (∥ 𝒙0− 𝒙★∥M/𝜀)2/3  fortherobust objective (Theorem 1) and of the form𝑂  ∥𝒙0− 𝒙★∥M (𝑝−2)/(3𝑝−2)  for the interpolating objective (Theorem 2). To make this useful for us and actually find M, we need an algorithm to calculate John’s ellipsoid for the level sets of our losses (or some other ellipsoid that gets an even better approximation factor). To this end, a result of Manoj and Ovsiankin [MO25] gives us an efficient algorithm to find thisℓ2 geometry for the loss families we consider. 2.4 Algorithm for Distributionally Robust Regression In Algorithm 1, we present pseudocode for the algorithm that yields the guarantee in Theorem 1. Thus, by applying Theorem 3.4 as a preprocessing step, we get anℓ2 geometry under which we can run the accelerated proximal algorithms. In the remainder of this subsection, we present Algorithm 1, our algorithm for minimizing the distributionally robust loss. In words, Lemma 7.8 tells us that each proximal query we make in Algorithm 3 (see Line 7 of Algorithm 3) has bounded objective value. In this subsection, we design and analyze an algorithm (Algorithm 4) that approximately solves the subproblem argmin e𝒙∈R𝑑 𝑓𝒒𝑡(e𝒙). 7.3.3 Smoothness of the Proximal Obje