REAL METHOD of "ProtoTS: Learning Hierarchical Prototypes for Explainable Time Series Forecasting" (arXiv 2509.23159v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose ProtoTS, a novel inter- pretable forecasting framework that achieves both high accuracy and transparent decision-making through modeling prototypical temporal patterns. Experiments on multiple realistic benchmarks, in- cluding a newly released LOF dataset, show that ProtoTS not only exceeds exist- ing methods in forecast accuracy but also delivers expert-steerable interpretations for better model understanding and decision support. It aids in preventing substantial financial losses and building the trust necessary (Rojat et al., 2021). A range of explainable time series forecasting methods have been developed to simultaneously en- sure interpretability and good predictive performance (Oreshkin et al., 2019; Lim et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024). For the output side, existing methods (Lim et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2024) mainly explain the prediction at individual time steps,lacking the ability to help users quickly interpret the rea- sons behind the overall trend in the forecast curve. For each instance, model computes its similarity to all prototypes to form a prediction, enabling detailed local interpretation. To address these challenges, we propose aPrototypicalTimeSeries Forecasting framework (ProtoTS) that effectively models the overall temporal patterns (C1) and enables prototypes to cap- ture the interactions among inputs (C2). This pattern occurs at specific combinations of covariates (i.e., when the inputs indicate both a holiday and the first month of the lunar calendar), enabling it to explain both the formation of the overall temporal pattern and how it is influenced by the combination of multiple input features (C2). To construct an effective end-to-end framework, we introduce the following technical innovations: Traditional prototypes are typically limited to explaining individual classification results, while we extend the prototypes so that they model a temporal pattern, which consists of a sequence of regression results. To address this, we design a hierarchical prototype learning strategy, where a small set of coarse prototypes ensures global interpretability, and prototypes are progressively refined into lower levels to capture local details and improve ac- curacy. To enable effective modeling of the inter- actions among input variables of different types and their impact on the output curve patterns, we compute the prototype-instance similarity by incorporating a multi-channel embedding and bottle- neck fusion mechanism, which improves both the interpretability and the accuracy of the model. Moreover, its accuracy decreases much more slowly when the amount of training data is reduced, compared to the baselines. Seeking richer dynamics, Transformer families like TFT (Lim et al., 2021) and TimeXer (Wang et al., 2024), introduce attention mechanisms to tackle this task. NBEATSx (Oreshkin et al., 2019) appends a dedicated stack for auxiliary factors on top of a residual basis expansion, TiDE (Das et al., 2023) factorizes temporal and feature projections with two dense encoders to harness known-future variables, and TSMixer (Ekam- baram et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023) alternates mixing layers to effectively model their interactions. Our method, ProtoTS, achieves strong perfor- mance on this task while offering interpretability and steerability for domain experts, effectively handling large amounts of heterogeneous variables while filtering out irrelevant information. Follow- ing the attribution-centric view of post-hoc explanations, TFT (Lim et al., 2021) provides explorable attention over input time steps, and DiPE-Linear (Zhao et al., 2024) parameterizes filters in both temporal and spectral domains to visualise the regions of interest. Such designs enrich the model’s architecture but leave the prototypes detached from the output. In contrast, our method is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to decode a prototype into a sequence of output variables (e.g., a 96-step forecasting curve), enabling holistic interpretation of temporal dynamics. The overall framework of ProtoTS, which comprises two main modules: the multi-channel prototype similarity computation module and the hierarchical prototype learning module. 3 METHOD 3.1 FORMULATION ANDFRAMEWORK Problem FormulationWe consider the task of time series forecasting with exogenous variables, as shown in Figure 1(a), since abundant heterogeneous exogenous variables provide rich information to boost endogenous predictability. The goal is to predict the future curve of the endogenous variable for the nextHtime steps, denoted asY L+1:L+H ={y L+1, . Themulti-channel prototype similarity computationmodule effectively models the interac- tions between input variables and their impact on prototypes. Thehierarchical prototype learning module structures prototypes hierarchically, with coarse-grained root prototypes capturing global patterns and fine-grained child prototypes modeling local variations, ensuring good explainability, steerability, and accuracy. The two modules will be explained in detail in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. 3.2 MULTI-CHANNELPROTOTYPESIMILARITYCOMPUTATION This module ensures effective modeling of interactions between input variables and their relations with prototypes by using three steps: themulti-channel embeddingstep effectively embeds hetero- geneous variables in separate channels, thebottleneck channel fusionstep then models complex interactions between variables without causing overfitting and outputs the final input embedding, and theprototype similarity computingstep finally estimates the relations between each input and the prototypes by computing the similarities between their embeddings. Multi-Channel EmbeddingIn ProtoTS, we adopt a multi-channel embedding where endoge- nous and exogenous variables are processed separately to achieve optimal encoding for each type. Specifically, endogenous variables are directly encoded through anendogenous encoding channel, 4 implemented as a non-linear projectionγusing a multi-layer perceptron with activation functions, a widely used design (Das et al., 2023). We categorize them into discrete variables (e.g., is holiday, day of week) and continuous variables (e.g., temperature, humidity), and apply tailored embedding methods to best capture the properties of each variable. We apply the bottleneck layer within an MLP-Mixer architecture (Tolstikhin et al., 2021), inserting it into both MLPfeature and MLPtime. Fusion is performed 