REAL METHOD of "Interleave-VLA: Enhancing Robot Manipulation with Image-Text Interleaved Instructions" (arXiv 2505.02152v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Interleave-VLA Scalable Training Flexible Input Open X-Embodiment Dataset (a) Open Interleaved X-Embodiment Dataset Containing over 210K image-text trajectories and is curated from with the aid of a high-quality MLLM cooperation pipeline. Existing methods relying on text-only instructions often strug- gle to generalize to unseen scenarios. Building on this insight, we in- troduce Interleave-VLA, the first robot learning paradigm capable of compre- hending interleaved image-text instructions and directly generating continuous action sequences in the physical world. We argue that the predominant reliance on text-only instructions in current generalist robotic policies constrains their ability to generalize. However, current VLA models (Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al.; Black et al., 2024) remain predominantly trained on text-only instructions—a setting we refer to as the Text- VLA paradigm. To address this limitation, we first build a high-quality interleaved image-text datasets, crucial for training multimodal models. This enables training Interleave-VLA with real-world in- teraction data and diverse visual instruction types. We then propose a new paradigm called Interleave-VLA, designed for generating continuous ac- tions from interleaved inputs. The interleaved format enables robust zero-shot generalization to novel objects and user-provided sketches unseen during training. We also categorize three recurring forms of attentional hallucination in Text-VLA:attentional bias,diffused attention, and attention leakage, which arise from linguistic ambiguity and distributional biases in text-only in- struction interpretation. • Generalization failures in VLAs often stem fromattentional hallucinations, which we summa- rized as attentional bias, diffused attention, and attention leakage, driven by(1)ambiguous con- texts and(2)training distribution biases (Section 4.1). • Modality diversity (e.g, interleaved data, web data) alleviates the hallucination fromtraining distribution biases, further enhancing generalization. Cross-modal training benefits performance in both interleaved evaluation and text-only evaluation (Section 4.3.3). As a result, the practical value of this paradigm remains underexplored due to a lack of real-world datasets and policies capable of handling such input In this work, we make the first step to bridge this gap by proposing Interleave-VLA: Pre-trained VLM Interleave-VLA Interleaved X-Embodiment Dataset Action Expert Move redbull can near brown chip. Training Adaptation Inference Crop Internet T ext observation<BOS> text1 image1<BOI> <EOI> text2 … … Crop T ext Internet Sketch Move into . Overview of the Interleave-VLA paradigm, featuring an extendable adaptation of Text- VLA to handle interleaved inputs, scalable training on a constructed large interleaved dataset, and versatile inference that supports a wide range of interleaved instructions. In this work, we proposeInterleave-VLA, a generalized paradigm that allows a robotic policy to generate actions conditioned on interleaved image-text inputs. Formally, a policyπ θ under the Interleave-VLA paradigm generates an actiona t at each timestept by sampling from a distribution conditioned on the statest:a t ∼π θ(· |st)where the state is defined as a tuples t = (It,q t,I). 3.2 INTERLEAVE-VLA PARADIGM Outlined in Figure 2, our Interleave-VLA paradigm, designed for generating continuous actions in the real world from interleaved inputs, comprises three core components:(1)a straightforward and effective adaptation module,(2)a scalable training process tailored for interleaved data, and(3)a versatile inference interface that supports interleaved instructions. The input processor is updated to support the interleaved format, while the core VLA architecture re- mains unchanged. Training.We train the interleaved-adaptedπ 0 model using the large-scale interleaved embodied dataset from Section 3.3, without modifying its hyperparameters or flow matching objective. 3.3 CONSTRUCTION OFOPENINTERLEAVEDX-EMBODIMENTDATASET A large-scale and high-quality pretraining dataset scales up vision-language-action (VLA) (Black et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al.) training. Our overall dataset generation pipeline consists of three main steps: To qualita- tively illustrate this, we compute the attention scores of target object tokens relative to the tokenized observation in out-of-domain settings. attention is broadly scattered with no dominant focus, indicating uncertainty about the target;(3)Attentional Bias: In con- trast, Interleave-VLA outperforms Text-VLA baselinesby leveraging in-context visual grounding and cross-modality training to reduce attentional hallucinations. Optionally, pretraining is performed on the robot data in Section 3.3, training Text-VLA on text instructions and Interleave-VLA on interleaved instructions. To validate this, we extend Interleave-VLA to OpenVLA (Kim et al.), a state-of-the-art VLA model with a distinct architecture and training objective compared toπ 0. Furthermore, our approach demonstrates strong emergent zero-shot generalization to diverse user instructions never seen during training—including hand-drawn sketches, cropped images, and Internet photos—making it both practical and flexible for real-world robotic applications. Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. However, our approach is not restricted to VLM-based methods and can be extended to other sequence modeling approaches for action prediction (Chi et al., 2023; Team et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Brohan et al., 2022). Since SimplerEnv tasks use text-based instructions, we adapt them into interleaved image- text instructions using the method described in Section 3.3, based on the first frame of the rollout before the robot arm begins moving. Unlike prior methods that rely on separate VLMs to detect target objects in the scene and inject this information into the robot policy, our Interleave-VLA directly leverages interleaved image-text instruction to perform these tasks without requiring additional modules. Both Interleave-VLA (including the co-trained variant) andπ 0 models were trained with a learning rate of 5e-5, a global batch size of 1024, for approximately 30 epochs. Overall, these results show that training with large-scale, diverse robot data enhances model generalization to novel tasks and robot embodiments, supporting our approach of curating the Open Interleaved X-E