REAL METHOD of "High-dimensional Mean-Field Games by Particle-based Flow Matching" (arXiv 2512.01172v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we propose a particle-based deep Flow Matching (FM) method to tackle high-dimensional MFG computation. In each iteration of our proximal fixed-point scheme, particles are updated using first-order information, and a flow neural network is trained to match the velocity of the sample trajectories in a simulation-free manner. Our method demonstrates promising performance on non-potential MFGs and high-dimensional OT problems cast as MFGs through a relaxed terminal-cost formulation. These are also referred to as first-order MFGs, as the PDE defining the constraint setC (ρ,v) is of first order. More recently, MFGs 1 arXiv:2512.01172v1 [stat.ML] 1 Dec 2025 have attracted growing attention due to their emerging connections with topics in machine learning, such as optimal transport [7], normalizing flows [23, 50], deep neural network training [45], and reinforcement learning [38, 5]. Nevertheless, it suggests that even when the objective changes at each step, moving toward the best response of the current step eventually leads to an MFNE. In this work, we propose an iterative neural method for high-dimensional MFGs that, at each step, jointly updates particle trajectories in Lagrangian coordinates and trains a Flow-Matching (FM) network to parameterize the velocity field. Next, we train a neural flow model vθ to match the velocity of the updated particle trajectories via a mean-squared loss as in FM [2, 33, 35]. In practice, the FM step allowsv θ to be trained over batches of sampled trajectories and accelerates convergence. We propose a proximal fixed-point scheme that consists of a particle optimization step and a Flow Matching step concurrently in each iteration to solve high-dimensional MFGs. 1.1 Related works Fictitious play in solving MFGsFictitious play, first introduced in [8, 9], is a classical algorithm in game theory. (a) and (b) show the sample trajectories at the beginning of training and after 20 epochs of training, respectively, where “optimized particles” stands for trajectories after a particle update, and “velocity field” shows trajectories resampled from a learned velocity field by FM, see Algorithm 1. The fictitious play is related to the generalized Frank–Wolfe algorithm, as pointed out in [30], and the work furtherly used this connection to accelerate the algorithm and also proved a faster convergence rate in the MFC setting. For example, if one adopts a mesh-based discretization, then the algorithm would still face the curse of dimensionality whendis large. Flow-based methods and simulation-free methodsTo avoid discretizing the state space, recent works use neural networks to represent the trajectories of particles and define the objective directly in terms of network parameters. Even in those cases, the objective depends nonlinearly on the population distributionρ, which is coupled with the velocity fieldvthrough a PDE constraint. In comparison, our method addresses the first-order MFGs, which is a broad class of problems, and in particular, allowsF,Gto depend onρ. Conceptually, our approach leverages the Lagrangian coordinates 3 formulation of MFGs and trains the flow velocity field by directly matching to sample velocities. Our approach adopts flow matching techniques in modern deep generative models, and we demonstrate the efficiency of our method on high-dimensional image data. Constraint sets are denoted byC ·, where the subscript indicates the constrained variable. inf (ρ,v)∈C(ρ,v) J(ρ, v) := Z 1 0 Z 1 2 ∥v(x, t)∥2dρt(x)dt+ Z 1 0 F(ρ t)dt+G(ρ 1), (7) IfF,Ghave first variationsF, G:P 2(Rd)×R d →R∪ {+∞}underL 2 metric, and(ˆρ,ˆv)∈C (ρ,v) is the minimizer to(7), then(ˆρ,ˆv)solves the fixed-point problem(1). 2.3 Fictitious play Fictitious play is a classical algorithm in game theory, first introduced in [9] and later adapted to MFGs in [10]. 3 Method We first reformulate the MFG problem (1) in Lagrangian coordinates and express the objective as an ex- pectation. We then propose a proximal fixed-point algorithm that alternates between updating the particles Xand the velocity fieldv. Our method utilizes optimization over sample particle trajectories, namely “particle-based”, which is more scalable to high-dimensional spaces. In addition, this pair (˜ρ,˜v) will preserve or lower the objectiveJcompared to the objective on ˜X(Lemma 4.1). A key observation from fictitious play is that convergence to a fixed point is possible as long as each update yields a small improvement relative to the current objective, even though the objective itself changes at each iteration. Specifically, givenv (ℓ), we pick a step sizeα ℓ and do the following three steps: More importantly, ifX (ℓ+1/2) is not induced by a velocity fieldv, then the subsequent flow matching and resampling steps also result in a decay of the objective. As a result, the three steps together yield a decay in the objective value, as stated in the following two lemmas. update parametersθof the velocity networkv θ to match empirical trajectories of{X i,tj , j≤m} n i=1 with batch sizen 2 forL 2 steps of Adam with the training loss (20); 8end Output:parameterized velocity fieldv θ. The (sub)gradient ofG[ρ tm] at a pointxcan then be computed via auto-differentiation. Then, for any smooth perturbationY:R d ×[0, T]→R d withY(x,0) = 0, a first-order expansion gives J(X+ϵY;ρ) =J(X;ρ) +ϵ Z 1 0 ⟨Yt,−(∂ ttX) t +∇F[ρ t](Xt)⟩µ dt+⟨Y 1,(∂ tX) 1 +∇G[ρ 1](X1)⟩µ  +o(ϵ), where the first-order term inϵprovides the descent direction. The training loss is min θ ∆t n nX i=1 mX j=1 vθ(Xi,tj−1 , tj−1)− 1 ∆t (Xi,tj −X i,tj−1 ) 2 .(20) We optimizeθforL 2 steps using Adam, with a batch ofn 2 trajectories per step. To summarize, at theℓ-th epoch, we first samplenparticles and compute their trajectories usingv θ, then run the particle update forLiterations. In addition, compared to simulation-based methods, our approach offers a simpler and more efficient training process: First, although the particle-based method is simulation-free, it incurs significant memory costs when the number of trajectories and that of time steps are 12 large. Since the objective is convex and the constraint is linear, (˜ρ,˜m) solves min ( ˜ρ,˜m)∈C(ρ,m) J(˜ρ,˜m;ρ) (30) if and only if it satisfies the first-order optimality condition: Hyperparameter V alues Total outer loop 100 Velocity field training steps 100 Velocity field learning rate 0.01 Particle optimization steps 100 Particle optimization learning rate 0.01 Number of timesteps 20 D.3 Image-to-