REAL METHOD of "MindPilot: Closed-loop Visual Stimulation Optimization for Brain Modulation with EEG-guided Diffusion" (arXiv 2602.10552v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Yet such methods are constrained to low-level visual domains and cannot generate semantically rich, naturalistic images that engage higher-order brain representations. Feature Similarity SDXL Generation Search by image similarity Pseudo-model Image Batch CLIP Image Feature EEG Signal EEG Feature Target Signal Target Feature EEG Encoder ANN MLP New Iteration IP-Adapter Database EEG Encoder A B C Training Inference Trainable Frozen Cosine Similarity Target activation (1) (2) (3) (4) Indifferentiable Similarity Score Figure 2:Framework.A. Semantic feature from a pre-trained EEG encoder f, aligned with CLIP embedding.C. 3 METHODS We introduce MindPilot, a closed-loop framework for generating the optimal visual stimuli to align with the target brain activity (Fig. Direct Reward Update.First, we compute an intermediate score S1 t by applying a direct reward to all images whose indices are in the best set Ibest. The proxy model combines a pre-trained backbone with a regression head trained to minimize Mean Square Error (MSE) against real EEG recordings. Specifically, we replace the classification layer of the backbone with a CˆT regression layer, where each unit corresponds to a flattened EEG channel–timepoint signal. Metrics(%) AlexNet ResNet50 CORnet-S MoCo ViT OpenCLIP DINO DINO2 SYNCLRLower Noise Ceiling RÒ33.09p3.93q33.49p4.10q33.56p4.25q32.68p3.95q31.27p4.32q33.40p4.36q33.39p4.20q33.70p4.64q27.69p3.89q38.75p6.26q 3.4 INTERACTIVESEARCH To bootstrap optimization with an unknown target image, drawing inspiration from interactive retrieval methods (Ferecatu & Geman, 2007), we propose a similarity-weighted sampling approach. ˆz˚“z K´η∇ ˆfpz K;Z nq,(4) where K is the number of diffusion sampling steps, η is the step size that decays linearly, zK denotes the CLIP embedding from generated latents and Z n“rz 1,¨¨¨,z ns. Online Iteration AlgorithmWe integrate an EEG-guided genetic algorithm to optimize stimuli towards the evolution direction of the target neural activity. The specific procedural steps of our algorithm are outlined in Algorithm 2. Unlike the interactive searching process in Algorithm 1, after sampling the stimulus image in each step t, we perform crossover and "mutation" on the image embeddings and then sample new images from the image space. Similarity score between MindPilot’s neural rep- resentations (steps 1, 2, last, and best-step) and the target, versus random stimuli.B. Average similarity at different iteration steps A B Improvement across subjects Correlation analysis between EEG and CLIP C DModel Fit 4 EXPERIMENTS 4.1 SETUP EEG readout from proxy modelsWe trained a family of predictors to approximate EEG responses evoked by visual stimuli using the THINGS-EEG2 dataset (Gifford et al., 2022; Grootswagers et al., 2022). 4.2 EEG-GUIDEDINTERACTIVESEARCH We first tested whether MindPilot can retrieve a target stimulus from the THINGS-EEG2 search space (50 categories × 12 conditions = 600 images). 3 reports different feature-based Semantic Similarity Score (SS) and Intensity Similarity Score (IS) scores, showing that our method effectively identifies target stimulus within limited iterations. We reported per-subject SS and IS values, from initial stimuli (Random) and from optimized stimuli (Step-1 and Step-Best). The comparisons across the random baseline, initial step (step-1), and optimized step (step-best) demonstrate that our iteration effectively aligns neural spectral patterns with visual semantics. participants (N=10) first memorized a target image, then rated subsequent images on their similarity score to the target, ranging from 0 [least similar] to 1 [highest similar].C. of similarity score from step-1 to step-10 stimuli generated by MindPilot across all 10 participants.E-F. of similarity score from step-1 to step-10 stimuli generated by MindPilot across all 10 participants. Lastly, it is important to extend MindPilot to other modalities to provide richer neural feedback and support higher-level control objectives (e.g., attention, memory, or affective modulation). A.5:Additional Heuristic Generation Examples A.1 MORE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS A.1.1 PUBLICDATASETS We conducted our experiments using the training set of the THINGS-EEG2 dataset (Gifford et al., 2022; Grootswagers et al., 2022), which consists of a large EEG corpus from 10 human subjects performing a visual task. par- ticipants first memorize a target image and then view candidate images while EEG is recorded. 18 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1Closed-loop Interactive Search Algorithm 1:Initialize:DatabaseΩ“tu 1, ..., uNu. 17:P t`1pujqÐ exppSt`1pujqqřN l“1 exppSt`1pulqq 18:tÐt`1 19:untilconvergence criteria met 20:Return:arg max ujPΩ Stpujq A.1.3 INTERACTIVESEARCHINGALGORITHMPIPELINE We provide a more detailed description of algorithm 1. The algorithm begins by initializing equal selection probabilities for each image in the candidate set, denoted as P0pujq“ 1 N , where N is the total number of images in the retrieval set. 19 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 2Closed-loop Heuristic Generation Algorithm 1: 16:P t`1pujqÐ exppSt`1pujqqř lPΩt`1 exppSt`1pulqq 17:tÐt`1 18:untilconvergence criteria met 19:Return:arg max ujPΩt Stpujq For each image uk ` in the subset Ut the algorithm computes a similarity score simxuk `, utargety by comparing the image’s representation with the target. If simmax does not meet a predefined threshold, the reward is considered insufficient, and the algorithm returns to the image selection step, effectively trying a new action within the same state. As for each image uk ` in Ut, its selection probability Pt`1puk `q is updated by multiplying with a constant factor, representing a policy improvement step that prioritizes images likely to yield higher rewards. A.1.4 HEURISTICGENERATIONALGORITHM PIPELINE We provide a more detailed description of algorithm 2. We selected ATM-S because it achieved the strongest results among the EEG-to-image encoders evaluated on the THINGS-EEG2 retrieval task. Table A.1:EEG-to-image encoder performance on THINGS-EEG2 (in-subject).Among the listed decoding baselines, ATM-S has the highest reported retrieval accuracy across the displayed k-way metrics and is therefore used as an oracle/reference ceiling. A.6, we employ the pre-trained AlexNet end-to-end model as the black-box proxy model and use ATM-S, which is based on semantic similarity score (both the training and testing signals are synthesized), to obt