REAL METHOD of "SceneCOT: Eliciting Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in 3D Scenes" (arXiv 2510.16714v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We first introduce a grounded Chain-of- Thought reasoning method in 3D scenes (SCENECOT), decoupling a complex reasoning task into simpler and manageable problems, and building corresponding visual clues based on multimodal expert modules. To enable such a method, we develop SCENECOT-185K, the first large-scale grounded CoT reasoning dataset, consisting of 185K high-quality instances. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first successful application of CoT reasoning to 3D scene understanding, enabling step-by-step human-like reasoning and showing potential for extension to broader 3D scene understanding scenarios. Addressing these challenges calls for principled task decomposition and step-by-step reasoning, yet existing research has largely overlooked this aspect. In the language domain, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) has demonstrated the power of step-by-step problem decomposition, enabling large language models to achieve superhuman performance in math, science, and logic tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2025; Jaech et al., 2024). Example of how SCENECOT decomposes a 3D question into step-by-step reasoning: In this work, we present SCENECOT, a novel framework for step-by-step grounded reasoning in 3D scenes. • We propose SCENECOT, a novel Chain-of-Thought reasoning framework that decomposes complex 3D scene reasoning tasks into manageable steps, enabling human-like, grounded, and interpretable reasoning. • We construct SCENECOT-185K, the first large-scale dataset with stepwise grounded reasoning traces in 3D scenes, containing over 185K high-quality instances. while 3D-LLMs can encode multimodal representations, they rarely incorporate structured, step-by-step reasoning mechanisms that are essential for robust 3D scene understanding. These capabilities are significantly enhanced by Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022), which decomposes complex tasks into step-by-step subproblems. More recent works attempt to bring step-by-step reasoning into MLLMs. Bridging this gap requires designing frameworks that integrate step-by-step grounded reasoning with explicit grounding-QA coherence, which is the focus of our work. STEP-BY-STEPREASONING IN3DSCENES In this section, we present the design of SCENECOT, beginning with the formalization of step-by- step reasoning traces in common 3D reasoning tasks (Sec. 3.1 CHAIN-OF-THOUGHTS INSCENECOT Given a 3D scene, an agent’s situation, and a question to be answered, we define the reasoning trace for answering the question as a concatenation of the following step-by-step descriptions: We first generate detailed grounding instructions that encode object semantics, attributes, and relational context. Each stage introduces explicit grounding signals (e.g., objects, attributes, spatial positions), ensuring step-by-step reasoning and improved grounding-QA coherence. These instructions guide the grounding model to retrieve or compute relevant information based on task requirements, such as retrieving 2D images for attribute recognition and exporting object class probabilities for object existence verification. These models are initialized with pre-trained weights and jointly updated during the training of SCENECOT. 3.1, jointly optimizing the reasoning engine and grounding modules under the following objective: Lground is a cross-entropy loss applied only to the specialized grounding module for accurate object grounding. In the inference stage, SCENECOT follows the reasoning steps specified by the predicted 3D-CoTs, invoking the appropriate modules to generate the final answer. 4 THESCENECOT-185K DATASET To enable the learning of SCENECOT, we develop a large-scale 3D-CoTs dataset, SCENECOT- 185K, containing 185K data instances to support step-by-step reasoning in 3D scenes. Region-relevant and Question-relevant Objects ExtractionFirst, we design a rule-based proce- dure to extract target objects based on the agent’s location and orientation within the 3D scene. Secondly, for the target object entities, we design a rule-based method forExistence/Countingto ensure the correctness. Specifically, we randomly assign values between 0.5 and 1.0 to represent target objects, while assigning values between 0 and 0.5 to non-target 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 How many brown tables are in my right? Direction parsing right table-1, chair-3, table -5, carpet-9 Region object selectionQuestion type: The process involves identifying the question type, grounding relevant objects, computing relative positions based on agent location and orientation, and generating the final answer through step-by-step reasoning. In addition, we analyze the grounding-QA coherence metrics provided in Beacon3D to highlight the improvements brought by our method. To ensure fairness, we retrain several baselines on our training set and report the updated results. The resulting image feature is then projected into the language embedding space via learnable projection layers. During training, we freeze these projection layers and apply LoRA to fine-tune the parameters of the LLM. Results show that removing any of these components degrades performance, highlighting their importance for robust step-by-step reasoning. In SCENECOT, the grounding module is trained with an additional loss term based on PQ3D, encouraging accurate object grounding during learning. Overall, these results highlight the grounding loss as an important factor for maintaining step-by-step grounding consistency and improving reasoning accuracy. 6 CONCLUSION We presented SCENECOT, a framework for step-by-step grounded reasoning in 3D scenes. To enable this, we built SCENECOT-185K, the first large-scale dataset of grounded Chain-of-Thought reasoning traces with rich stepwise annotations linking language and 3D context. Beyond accuracy, our method generates interpretable reasoning traces that make the decision process transparent. These results demonstrate that step-by-step grounded reasoning is both effective and necessary for robust 3D scene understanding, laying a foundation for advancing multimodal LLMs toward human-like reasoning in real-world 3D environments. 3.2, we describe how the modular components are trained and the pre-trained models we adopt. Our study focuses on improving 3D scene reasoning through step-by-step grounded reasoning. Our method inherits biases and limitations from pre-trained models and datasets, such as poten- tial semantic or linguistic