REAL METHOD of "Align-Then-stEer: Adapting the Vision-Language Action Models through Unified Latent Guidance" (arXiv 2509.02055v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this challenge, we introduceAlign-Then- stEer (ATE), a novel, data-efficient, and plug-and-play adaptation framework.ATE first aligns disparate action spaces by constructing a unified latent space, where a variational autoencoder constrained by reverse KL divergence embeds adaptation actions into modes of the pre-training action latent distribution. Compared to direct fine-tuning of representative VLAs, our method improves the average multi-task success rate by up to9.8%in simulation and achieves a striking 32% success rate gainin a real-world cross-embodiment setting. Date:September 2, 2025 Project:https://align-then-steer.github.io/ Code:https://github.com/TeleHuman/Align-Then-Steer Correspondence to:Chenjia Bai (baicj@chinatelecom.cn) 1 Introduction Vision-Language Action models (VLAs) (Brohan et al., 2022; Zitkovich et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024; Black et al., 2024) have emerged as a powerful solution to empower general-purpose robotic manipulation with broad generalization in tasks and environments. Specifically, a representative training recipe for VLA typically consists of two phases: how can we achieve VLA adaptation for both cross-embodiment and cross-task scenarios under a limited data regime? To this end, we propose a data-efficient adaptation method, namedAlign-Then-stEer (ATE), for cross-embodiment and cross-task VLA adaptation by explicitly mitigating action-distribution mismatch via a two-stage strategy. In the first stage, we construct a unified latent action space to bridge the domain gap between embodiments and tasks involved during pre-training and the adaptation phases. It is achieved by training a standard Variational Autoencoder (VAE) on the pre-training action-labeled dataset to obtain a latent prior, followed by learning a smaller VAE on limited adaptation data with a reverse KL divergence constraint toward the learned pre-trained latent distribution. In the second stage, inspired by classifier-guided diffusion models (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021; Bansal et al., 2023), we design a guidance function grounded in the shared latent space that can be seamlessly integrated into the training objective 2 of diffusion- or flow-based VLAs. Notably, our method requires no modification to the original VLA architecture and introduces only negligible overhead, i.e., adaptation is highly efficiently achieved by training two separate lightweight VAEs. By leveraging the mode-seeking behavior of reverse KL, our method constructs a unified, structured latent space that embeds target actions into modes of the pre-training latent distribution. However, they mostly focus on architectures and objectives in the pre-training phase, while we aim to improve the efficiency for cross-embodiment and cross-task adaptation on pretrained VLAs. 3 Preliminaries Training objective of VLAs.The training of VLA models typically contains two stages: (i) obtain an initial policy via pre-training the model on a cross-embodiment action-labeled datasetDpretrain, where we denote the set of embodiments included in it asMpretrain = {E1,E 2, . Our goal is to adapt the pretrained model inDpretrain to a specific embodimentEtarget given an adaptation datasetDadaptation, where Etarget is not be involved in pre-training, i.e.,Etarget /∈ Mpretrain. 4 Methodology The proposed ATE algorithm mainly consists of two stages: 4.1 Alignment through Unified Action Latent Space A pre-trained VLA acquires a general visuomotor prior by modeling the distributionp(¯at:t+H−1 |ot, l), where the action chunk ¯at:t+H−1 of length H, observationo t and language instruction l are sampled from the pre-training data Dpretrain. Such a prior effectively captures the action distributionpDpretrain (¯at:t+H−1 )from the pre-training embodimentsMpretrain. To bridge this gap, we employ two distinct Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to encode the fundamentally disparate pre-training and adaptation action data into a single, unified, and compact action latent space. Learning Pre-training Action Latent.We construct a pre-training action-VAEVpretrain := {Eϕ, Dϕ} to compress all possible action chunks in the pre-training data into a low-dimensional latent spaceZ, which consists of a Transformer encoderE ϕ and a Transformer decoderDϕ. The objective can be simplified as, L(ϕ;D ← Dpretrain) =E pD(¯at:t+H−1 )Eqϕ(z|¯at:t+H−1 )[logp ϕ(¯at:t+H−1 |z)]− (1−α)E pD(¯at:t+H−1 )[DKL(qϕ(z|¯at:t+H−1 )∥p(z))]−(α−λ−1)D KL(qϕ(z)∥p(z)),(5) where Vpretrain is parameterized byϕ, pD(¯at:t+H−1 )is an abbreviation for pDpretrain (¯at:t+H−1 ), and α and λ are hyperparameters that control penalty strength. Embedding Adaptation Action Latent into Pre-training Action Latent Space.With the pre-training action VAE Vpretrain, we can obtain the learned action latent distributionqϕ(z)by marginalizing over all action chunks in Dpretrain. Thus, the pre-training VAEVpretrain uses 6 the same action chunk lengthH as in the pre-training phase, while the adaptation action VAEVadaptation adopts the action chunk lengthL used in the adaptation phase. 2, our method not only steers the pre-trained VLA towards the adaptation data, but also constrains its output to remain within the unified action latent space which happens to be a specific mode of the pre-training action latent space. By preventing the VLA from deviating far from this structured latent manifold, our method also implicitly helps preserve valuable visuomotor prior knowledge acquired during pre-training. Together, these baselines represent the leading paradigms of robotic foundation models, allowing us to evaluate how our aligned and structured action latent space contributes to efficient adaptation (Q3).Note that in all cases, the baseline comparison is against direct fine-tuning of these architectures without our method. Firstly, we adopt a two-step Info-VAE training scheme to learn structured latent representations over action chunks, which facilitates efficient guidance during downstream policy adaptation. In step-1, the training of VAE is performed on large-scale VLA pretraining datasets, aiming to capture transferable latent structure across diverse robot platforms and tasks. The results demonstrate that our method consistently enhances performance across tasks and architectures, particularly under limited data conditions. In addition to higher final performance, our method demonstrates improved sample efficiency, surpassing the RDT baseline at just 70k steps compared to 90k. Examining the training curves at 1