REAL METHOD of "Speculative Speculative Decoding" (arXiv 2603.03251v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Speculative Speculative Decoding Tanishq Kumar1,* Tri Dao2,3 Avner May3 1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2Department of Computer Science, Princeton University 3Together AI Abstract Autoregressive decoding is bottlenecked by itssequentialnature. Speculative decoding has become a standard way to accelerate inference by using a fast draft model to predict upcoming tokens from a slower target model, and then verifying themin parallelwith a single target model forward pass. We identify three key challenges presented by speculative speculative decoding, and suggest principled methods to solve each. Instead of slow, autoregressive sampling from a desired “target model,” it uses a fast “draft model” to predict the next few tokens that would be generated by the target model and then “verifies” these tokens in oneparallelforward pass of the target model. This verification is done according to an algorithm that guarantees the resulting tokens are drawn from the distribution of the target model. Can we eliminate the sequential dependence between drafting and verification? We introducespeculative speculative decoding(SSD), a unifying framework for methods that aim to parallelize drafting and verification. (Center) In our algorithm, speculation runs on a separate device (1×H100) in parallel with verification; the draft precomputes speculations for many possible verification outcomes and returns the speculated tokens immediately if one occurs. There are three main challenges in optimizing SSD algorithms. First, the draft model must correctly anticipate the verification outcome, which includes not just how many speculated tokens were accepted, butwhichbonus token was sampled. Third, any SSD algorithm must have a fallback strategy to handle failed attempts at predicting verification outcomes correctly. We presentSaguaro, an optimized SSD algorithm that incorporates targeted optimizations for each challenge: •In Section 4.1, we frame the problem of predicting verification outcomes in terms of con- strained optimization, and introduce a technique that uses the most likely draft logits to predict the bonus token, doing so with up to 90% accuracy. •In Section 4.2, we identify a tension between accurately predicting verification outcomes and generating high-quality speculations, and develop a sampling algorithm that allows balancing the two. Adopting this,Saguarooutperforms SD 20% even at larger batch sizes, despite doing more compute per batch element by decoding many possible outcomes simultaneously. 2.1 Speculative Decoding Speculative decoding accelerates sampling from a target distributionp target by using a cheaper draft distributionp draft to generate candidate continuations, and then using the target distribution to accept selectively. To verify, the target first computes probabilities for all the speculated tokens in parallel ina single forward pass. Second, tree-based methods introduce a large amount ofverifier compute—which is quite expensive due to the size of the target model—because the entire tree must be verified in the target model forward pass. Our method, on the other hand, scales up thespeculation computeby pre-speculating for many verification outcomes in parallel, but does not introduce any additional verifier compute. Lastly, it is important to note that our method can be combined with these tree-based approaches for further gains (see Appendix E for discussion). 3.1 Algorithm We present the SSD framework in Algorithm 1. It does so by predicting likely verification outcomes, and then preparing speculations for each of these outcomes in parallel, and storing these in a “speculation cache” (defined formally below). For intuition on the SSD algorithm and why it is lossless, consider the similarities with specula- tive execution (Gonz´ alez & Gonz´ alez (1997)) for CPU optimization. 4.2 W AIT TO RECEIVEverif youtcomefromverifier ifend token∈verif y outcomethen return end ifverif y outcome∈cachethen spec tokens←cache[verif y outcome] else spec tokens←fallback speculate( verify outcome, primary spec, backup spec ) // Sec. 4.3 end end Definition 4.We define thespeculation cacheS T for roundTas a dictionary mapping from a set of verification outcomesV T to precomputed speculations for those outcomes. The expected speedup of Algorithm 1 relative to autoregressive decoding is then: Then ifT SD, ESD represent the latency and expected number of generated tokens from a draft model in SD, then the SSD speedup over SD can be bounded by: 4.1.1 Algorithm Definition 10.We define thefan-outF p k := {vT := (k′, t∗)∈ ST |k ′ =k} at positionkto be the number of verification outcomes withkaccepted tokens that are included in the speculation cache, given the previous iteration was speculated by the primary speculator.F b k is defined analogously for the backup speculator. Then the optimal choice ofF p k values for k∈[0, K]under the constraint PK k=0 F p k ≤B, follows a capped geometric series: 4.2.1 Algorithm Definition 13.We define asampling schemeas a functionσ:R V →∆ V−1 from model logits zdraft ∈R V to a probability distributionp∈∆ V−1 . 4.3.1 Algorithm We designSaguaro’s cache miss strategy based on the observation that cache misses occuralmost certainlyat large batch sizes, and that when this happens, in SSD thewhole batchmust wait for the backup speculator to complete before being verified. Though speculative decoding algorithms are designed to trade off compute for lower latency, we show in Figure 7 (right) that SSD pushes the Pareto frontier across both latency and throughput, with the biggest gains at lower batch sizes. The expected speedup of Algorithm 1 relative to autoregressive decoding is then: We will first prove this speedup equation,assuming we know the overall cache hit ratep hit (conditioned on choice of lookahead, cache topology, sampling algorithm, etc.). In order to deal with this recursive property ofp hit, we first writep hit as a recursive equation, which considers the iteration numbertof the algorithm. Then ifT SD, ESD represent the latency and expected number of generated tokens from a draft model in SD, then the SSD speedup over SD can be bounded by: Optimizing Saguaro sampling algorithm Theorem 15.For fan-outF, and draft logitsz, the cache hit ratep hit of theSaguarosampling algorithm increases asC→0. Assume without loss of generality that it was token 1 that was sampled and then rejected. Assume without loss of generality that it was token 3 that was