REAL METHOD of "QVGen: Pushing the Limit of Quantized Video Generative Models" (arXiv 2505.11497v5). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To this end, we introduce auxiliary modules (Φ) to mitigate large quantization errors, leading to significantly enhanced convergence. Our approach far outperforms previous PTQ (i.e., (f)) and QAT (i.e., (c)-(e)) methods. In contrast to post- training quantization (PTQ), quantization-aware training (QAT) can obtain superior performance through training quantized weights. Motivated by this finding, we introduce auxiliary modules Φ for the quantized video DM to mitigate quantization errors. To our knowledge, this isthe first QAT method for video generation and achieves effective3-bit and4-bit quantization. One typical training objective (i.e., predict the noise (Ho et al., 2020b)) of a denoiserϵθ with parameter θ can be formulated as follows: Quantization.The current video DM based on the diffusion transformer (DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023) architecture primarily consists of linear layers. Given an input X∈R m×k, a full-precision linear layer with weightW∈R n×m and the layer’s quantized version can be formulated as: 𝐖!=𝐋"𝐑′ (initial) 1−𝜆𝑟𝜆𝑟⨀ Trainingtime …… (1sttruncate)(2ndtruncate) →0 →0 [1][𝑢]→0 𝐑!=𝐑[:1−𝜆𝑟,:]𝐋!=𝐋[:,:1−𝜆𝑟]𝛾∈ℝ#×% u:Cosineannealing 𝑛 𝑚⨂ 𝐋𝐑 𝑟 𝑟Eliminate the low-impactinΦ… 𝛾⨀𝐋𝐑𝒬&𝐗 𝐖!SVD(b) Progressively Shrinking 𝚽via Rank-Decay 𝒖'𝒗'Σ'()*𝜎'⋅⋅(a) Improving Convergence with Auxiliary Modules𝚽 iter0iter1iter →∞… LosslandscapeNaïve Ours𝑅𝑇𝑇≤𝑑𝐷!"2𝑇𝜂#+1𝑇,𝜂$2#$%&𝒈$"" 𝝐∼𝒩(0,𝐼)𝜽+ 𝜽,- 𝑥. KD 𝐖 𝒬&𝐖− 𝐖!𝒬&𝐗 𝒬!𝐖𝒬!𝐗 Φ(𝒬!𝐗)Quanterror 𝐘(⨁ LinearLayerQuant.param.𝑠,𝑧 Layerwisequant. (a) This framework integrates auxiliary modules Φ to improve training convergence (Sec. Here, θt represents the parameters of the quantized video DM at training step t, constrained within a convex compact set Sd, while θ∗ = arg min θ∈Sd PT t=1 ft(θ) is the optimal parameters. Therefore, to reduce ∥gt∥2, we aim to stabilize the QAT process by mitigating aggressive training losses (e.g.,loss spikes) (Kumar et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024b). Specifically, we introduce a learnable auxiliary module Φ to enhance each quantized linear layer of a video DM. This trainable module aims to mitigate severe quantization- induced errors during QAT, thereby preventing aggressive training losses. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 (a)CogVideoX-2B (Yang et al., 2025) (b)Wan1.3B (WanTeam et al., 2025) Figure 3:(Upper) ∥gt∥2 vs.#steps and (Lower) training loss (i.e., Eq. (6))vs.#steps across different video DMs and 4-bit QAT methods.“Φ” denotes our approach in Sec. Compared with the previ- ous SOTA QAT method Q-DM (Li et al., 2023b), the proposed approach exhibits consistently lower ∥gt∥2 and reduced train- ing loss, as depicted in Fig. To improve QAT while eliminating the inference overhead, we propose to progressively remove Φ throughout the training process. We visualize the average of the singular values {σs}s=1,2,...,210 ∪ {σd} across layers of all Attention blocks (Vaswani et al., 2023) and feed-forward networks (FFNs), respectively. Specifically, we apply singular value decomposition (SVD) (Li et al., 2025; 2023c) toW Φ at various training steps: For example, approximately 73% (0-th step) of the average σs are ∼14× smaller than the largest one σ1; (ii) The presence of these small σs becomes increasingly pronounced as QAT progresses, with the proportion rising to 99% (2K-th step). Then, with a rank-based regularization γ applied, the forward computation of a quantized linear layer during training is modified as: During the subsequent training phase, the above procedures (i.e., both decomposition and decay) are iteratively applied. Training.We employ 16K captioned videos from OpenVidHQ-4M (Nan et al., 2025) as the training dataset. Additionally, we allocate the same training iterations for each decay phase (i.e., shrinking the remaining r to (1−λ)r ). “†” indicates PTQ methods and “*” signifies QAT methods. Detailed training loss curves across QAT methods and a trial of combining SVDQuant (Li et al., 2025) and QVGen can be found in Sec. Although a clear gap remains between 3-bit and 4-bit outputs, our approach shifts the Pareto frontier toward higher accuracy at a smaller model size than existing techniques (e.g., 3-bit QVGen for CogVideoX achieves a superior Aesthetic Quality than previous 4-bit methods in Tab. Results for huge DMs.To demonstrate the scalability of our method, we further test two huge video DMs, including CogVideoX1.5-5B and Wan14 B, at 720p resolution. By maintaining the same training iterations for each decay phase 5, a small ratio results in an excessively rapid descent of u in Eq. Inspired by network pruning (Han et al., 2015; 2016), we introduce a “Sparse” strategy that progressively prunes the largest values in WΦ during training. Q.” strategy, which first quantizes WΦ into 4×4-bit tensors with the same shape and then progressively removes them one by one. We believe such a strategy in EfficientDM can be combined with our method to 9 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 further improve training efficiency, and we plan to explore this in future work. Then, we propose an auxiliary module ( Φ) to achieve this. 19 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1Procedure of QVGen framework FUNCQVGEN(D,ϵ θ,it per decay phase,r,λ,b) Require:D— training dataset ϵθ(·)— full-precision DiT model it per decay phase— amount of training iterations per decay phase r— initial rank of the introduced auxiliary module λ— shrinking ratio b— quantization bit-width // Preprocess 1: For W4A4 group-wise SVDQuant (Li et al., 2025), we retain 16-bit precision for linear layers involved in adaptive normalization , embedding layers , and the key and value projections in cross-attention. For the attention module, we adopt full-precision flash-attention (Dao et al., 2022) to speed up inference, which is a common practice. It is also worth noting that, since we only quantize linear layers and employ flash-attention for the attention modules, the “Naive” baseline (see Tab. G TRAININGLOSSCURVES In this section, we present training loss curves across different methods and models. Specifically, using UniMatch (Xu et al., 2023a), we compute an optical-flow score as a motion difference score for each clip and split the training data (Sec. F, we show that our method can be combined with the current SOTA PTQ method SVDQuant (Li et al., 2025). The resulting layer-wise trained WΦ is then used to initialize Φ. Init.StrategyImagingQuality↑AestheticQuality↑DynamicDegree↑ SceneConsistency↑ OverallConsistency↑ CogVideoX-