REAL METHOD of "PhyScensis: Physics-Augmented LLM Agents for Complex Physical Scene Arrangement" (arXiv 2602.14968v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address these challenges, we propose PhyScensis, an LLM agent-based framework pow- ered by a physics engine, to produce physically plausible scene configurations with high complexity. Specifically, our framework consists of three main compo- nents: Experimental results show that our method outperforms prior approaches in scene complexity, visual quality, and physical accuracy, offering a unified pipeline for generating complex physical scene layouts for robotic manipulation. While effective in controlled cases, these methods are inherently constrained to the sce- narios envisioned by the designers. First, the core of the framework is a physics simulator with heuristic methods that generates scenes with a high degree of naturalness and physical plausibility, as well as complex stacking behaviors (Fig. By allowing objects to interact and settle under sim- ulated physical forces, our method can produce intricate and realistic placements. Besides the ability to generate physically accurate and structurally complex scenarios for robot ma- nipulation, our approach can generate diverse scenes free from training data requirements. Experimental results show that our method outperforms prior approaches in visual quality, semantic correctness, and physical accuracy. 3 METHOD Starting from an empty state with a supporting surface, our method generates complex physical scene layouts from a natural language prompt. •Free Placement:place-anywhereassigns a random, supported, and penetration-free position when explicit constraints are unnecessary. The stacking generation pipeline uses an occupancy-grid-based heuristic to efficiently compute candidate placement locations via grid search, which are then ranked by user requirements. In practice, we first apply the spatial solver to determine the 2D placements for objects specified to be placed on the supporting surface (such as a table), and then apply the physical solver to solve for objects with 3D placements. 4.1 BASELINES We compare our method with open-vocabulary scene generation approaches capable of placing ob- jects in local scenarios. Both baselines require asset retrieval; to ensure a fair comparison, we use the same asset dataset as our method. after simulating for a fixed number of timesteps, we compute the average displacement of objects, indicating physical stability. Analysis.As shown in Table 1, our method outperforms both baselines across all metrics. Furthermore, both baselines depend strongly on 2D visualizations, making them unreliable for cluttered scenes with significant occlusions.Architectperforms only a single inpainting step for local scenarios, while 3D-Generalistrequires repeated queries for each placement, limiting its scalability. 5, our method consistently produces more complex and cluttered scenes, with the ability to stack objects and iteratively expand scene complexity. We collect 300 scenarios for each method (ours and the baselines) and record one demonstration trajectory per scenario, resulting in training datasets for a diffusion policy (Chi et al., 2024). 1 further demonstrate that our method achieves higher success rates than the baselines, together with Fig. 4.4 USERSTUDY We conducted a user study comparing our method against two main baselines: Specifically, we selected6prompts and ran- domly sampled one result for each of the three methods, creating a total of18evaluation cases. Our method significantly outperforms the other two baselines, which is consistent with our quanti- tative metrics. Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python.Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020. A.2.2 FAILURECASES WITHBADRETRIEVAL One major factor contributing to poor generation quality is inaccurate retrieval. To adapt this method to our setting of text-only conditioned scene generation, we introduce an additional pipeline that queries GPT-4o to generate a list of object descriptions, and then uses CLIP features to retrieve corresponding 3D assets from the database. The result shows that our method, while still being diverse, resembles more to the human intuitions. In contrast, our method excels at generating these cases with the help of a physics engine. In contrast, our method is open-vocabulary, training-free, semantics-aware, and achieves substantially improved performance. Qualitative comparison between our method and ClutterGen (Jia & Chen, 2024) using the same asset library. For CLUTTERGENimplementation, we trained its RL policy for 2.5 million steps before inference with it. Even without stacking, our method produces substan- tially more compact and cluttered scenes than CLUTTERGEN. Quantitatively, across 500 sampled scenes, CLUTTERGEN places an average of 3.57 objects, whereas our method places an average of 14.77 and 22.30 objects under the no-stack and with-stack settings, respectively, with thewith-skipvariant achieving even higher counts. A.4 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS A.4.1 DETAILS ONASSETDATASETPREPARATION Since our method retrieves 3D assets from an existing dataset rather than generating them from scratch, we pre-process the dataset to support efficient retrieval and provide the necessary annota- tions. For each category, we retrieve the top 30 assets from BlenderKit and annotate them with ChatGPT, resulting in a base dataset of approximately 800 assets. We then generate atext descriptionof the asset based on its name and front-view image to support semantic retrieval and estimate the asset’ssupporting probability—i.e., how likely it can serve as a support surface (e.g., a closed laptop versus an open one)—as well as ranges ofphysical propertiessuch as mass, friction, and center-of-mass shift. Finally, we computeembeddingsusing both OpenAI text embeddings (OpenAI, 2024) and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) from the rendered images, enabling multimodal retrieval. Specifically, we first generate an image from the description using an image generation model (Rombach et al., 2021) and then call Tripo-AI’s image-to-3D API to obtain the corresponding mesh. def overlapX(A, B) return max(0, min(A.max_x, B.max_x) - max(A.min_x, B.min_x)) def overlapY(A, B) return max(0, min(A.max_y, B.max_y) - max(A.min_y, B.min_y)) A.yaw = default_yaw recompute_bbox(A) aligned_scale1 = overlapX(A, B) + overlapY(A, B) A.yaw = default_yaw + math.pi / 2 recompute_bbox(A) aligned_scale2 = overlapX(A, B) + overlapY(A, B) if aligned_scale1 > aligned_scale2: * For each object, please first give a one-sentence description for asset retrieva