REAL METHOD of "LEAP: Local ECT-Based Learnable Positional Encodings for Graphs" (arXiv 2510.00757v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we combine the differentiable approximation of the ECT (DECT) and its local variant (ℓ-ECT) to propose LEAP, a new end-to-end trainable local structural PE for graphs. We evaluate our approach on multiple real-world datasets as well as on a synthetic task designed to test its ability to extract topological features. Their broad applicability comes with several challenges that make them harder to process with standard deep learning architectures. Contemporary research largely focuses onmessage passing neural networks(MPNNs), i.e., architectures that are based on local diffusion-like concepts. As an alternative to MPNNs, inspired by the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), recent work focuses onpositional encodings(PEs) andstructural encodings(SEs) of graphs, denoting functions that assign embeddings to nodes based on locality or relational information, respec- tively (Dwivedi et al., 2023; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Ramp´aˇsek et al., 2022). To overcome this, we propose LEAP, a new end-to-end-trainable positional encoding that leveragesbothgeometryand topology. We propose a new graph positional encoding based on local ECTs, which is highly flexible and permits end-to-end training, specifically geared to work with geometric graphs. We observe that our method captures structural differences in graphs even in case the node features arenon-informative, thus also permitting to solve learning tasks for non-attributed graphs. We conduct extensive experiments on benchmark datasets that demonstrate that our method yields improved predictive powerin comparison to existing positional encodings when used in conjunction with graph neural networks. Hence, the state of a nodevat stept, denotedh (t) v , is computed as h(t) v =UPDATE  h(t−1) v ,AGGREGATE  {h(t−1) u :u∈ N(v)}  ,(1) where both AGGREGATE and UPDATE are learnable functions andN(v) denotes the neighbors of node v. Following von Rohrscheidt & Rieck (2025), we refer to a graph G together with feature vectors for each of its nodes as afeatured graphand adopt the following notation. Definition 1.Afeatured graphis a pair (G, x), where G is a (non-directed) graph, and x is a map that assigns each node v∈V(G) a feature vector x(v)∈R d. Architectures such as GPS (Ramp´aˇsek et al., 2022) combine multiple PEs, enabling global-attention layers to incorporate graph structure. Then {ℓ-ECT1[G, x;v]}v provides all the (non-learnable) needed information to perform a single message passing step on(G, x). 3.1ℓ-ECTBASEDPOSITIONALENCODING Given a featured graph (G, x)with d-dimensional node features, which may be static (i.e., the original node features or another PE), or learned (i.e., hidden states at some step of an MPNN), let T⊂[0,1] be a finite set of thresholds and Θ⊂S d−1 a finite set of directions. On the contrary, it can be integrated in graph neural network architectures to be trained in an end-to-end fashion. In addition, LEAP permits the set of directions Θ to be randomly initialized and theneitherkept fixedoroptimized during training. By default, we suggest 1-hop neighborhoods, making our methodas scalableas message passing, but we also describe two ways to control the locality of LEAP: 2 • Alternatively, we compute LEAP multiple times for each node with increasingm, then concatenate the results to obtain a PE that captures how them-hop neighborhoods evolve asmgrows. Step 2 above addresses normalization, but to minimize the effect of rotations, the projection in Step 4 should bepermutation invariantwith respect to the ECCs. We treat the ℓ-ECT of a node as a set of |T|-dimensional vectors, corresponding to the ECCs along the different directions in Θ, and process this set by a transformer encoder with a single attention head. As a variant of the previous projection, instead of feeding the transformer encoder the set of ECCs directly, we concatenate each ECCθ with the corresponding direction θ∈Θ before passing it to the encoder. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3.3 PROPERTIES We first discuss thecomputational complexityof our method. Given an m-hop subgraph Nm(v,G) for each vertex v, calculating the ℓ-ECT has a total computational complexity of O(P v |Nm(v,G)| ). For theHIVdataset (Wu et al., 2018), where nodes have categorical features, we exploit the end-to-end differentiability of the ECT by extending the architecture with a learnable embedding layer that maps these features intoR 3, where LEAP is computed. Architectures.We fix four “backbone” architectures to which we add different positional en- codings, namely (i) a GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), (ii) a GAT (Veli ˇckovi´c et al., 2018), (iii) a GIN (Xu et al., 2019), and (iv) NoMP (“no message passing”), a model that we introduce based on a transformer encoder. For theAlchemydataset, we scale the architectures to 10 layers with 64-dimensional hidden states. The NoMP architecture projects node features into a 16-dimensional latent space with a linear layer, followed by a single self-attention layer that produces a 16-dimensional state for each node. As a loss term, we use thecross entropy lossexcept for theAlchemydataset, where we use the mean squared error loss. Table 1 reports the relative increase of the best-performing method compared to the worst-performing method. As before, we fix the architecture to NoMP so that models access structural information only through the PE, and use attention with PEas the projection strategy for LEAP. To the best of our knowledge, this is thefirstapproach to integrate the ℓ-ECT into deep learning architectures in an end-to-end trainable fashion. Our experiments show that LEAP consistently outperforms established baselines across multiple architectures and datasets, with learned directions further improving performance in most tasks, thereby highlighting the benefits of making this step trainable. Additionally, we introduced a synthetic task in which our approach achieved perfect accuracy, demonstrating its ability to capture 9 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 topological information independent of node features, which the evaluated MPNNs (GCN/GAT) alone failed to recover. LEAP is particularly well-suited to provide local structural information to architectures that rely on global attention mechanisms, where graph structure is not directly modeled and multiple PEs are combined to capture complementary notions of graph position. First, it is not a purely structural PE, as it requiresnode featuresto comput