REAL METHOD of "ViPRA: Video Prediction for Robot Actions" (arXiv 2511.07732v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We train these latent ac- tions using perceptual losses and optical flow consistency to ensure they reflect physically grounded behavior. Our method outperforms strong baselines, with a 16% gain on the SIMPLER benchmark and a 13% improvement across real world manipulation tasks. By training with both objectives, the model learns to capture both semantic intent and physical dynamics. (i) A scalable method to extract fine-grained motion-centric latent actions from unlabeled hu- man and robot videos using perceptual and optical flow consistency losses. Recent works explore auxiliary objectives including visual trace prediction (Niu et al., 2024), chain-of-thought reason- 210000 hours of pretraining data (Collaboration et al., 2023) and 5-100 hours of finetuning demonstrations 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 ing (Wei et al., 2022), and conversational instruction tuning (Li et al., 2025c). In contrast, ViPRA eliminates the labeled data requirement by leveraging unlabeled videos during pretraining and incorporates temporal dynamics through joint prediction of future visual states and multi-step latent actions, which provides robust priors for high- frequency control. Different from the above, policy supervision approaches (Luo et al., 2025a;b) use video models as supervision or reward sources to train policies, though evaluations have so far focused on simulation or relatively constrained real world tasks. Recent methods impose discrete information bottlenecks with vector quantization encoders (van den Oord et al., 2017) and predict these tokens during policy learning (Ye et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Bu et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024; NVIDIA et al., 2025b), achieving strong real world results through imitation. Some train inverse dynamics models on limited labeled demonstrations before applying them to unlabeled video (Baker et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023), while others treat latent actions as abstract embodiments and jointly train policies with inverse dynamics model predictions across embodiments (Jang et al., 2025). Tokenizer 𝑜𝑡−1 𝑜𝑡 Noisy Actions Latent Action Embedding 𝐸𝜙 Tokenizer Latent Action Decoder 𝐻𝜓 Flow Decoder 𝐻𝜂 𝑜𝑡+3Video Prediction Latent Action Prediction Flow-matching Multimodal Pretraining Continuous Finetuning ℒpretrain = ℒimg + ℒact ℒfinetune = ℒFM Action Encoder 𝐸𝛾 𝑐 Cover bowl with the cloth Latent Action Learning Figure 2:ViPRA frameworkcomprises of: A neural quantization bottleneck extracts discrete latent action sequencesz t:t+L−1 provided image sequenceso t:t+L from action- less human and robot videos, trained via latent lossL latent to capture motion-centric dynamics. A video-language model jointly predicts future observationso t+H and latent action sequencesz t:t+H−1 from past frames(o t−1, ot)and task descriptionc, using lossL pretrain. Achieving this requires effectively utilizing large-scale data, architectures that expose motion-centric signals, and stable training pipelines. pixel-levelL 1 reconstruction loss Lrec for accurate frame prediction, perceptual lossL LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) to capture high-level structure beyond pixel accuracy, and optical flow consistency lossL flow to encourage physically plausible motion patterns: Llatent =L rec +λ LPIPSLLPIPS +I(step> α flow)λflowLflow,(2) where the flow loss is activated only afterα flow warm-up steps to avoid instability from poor early reconstructions. 4.2 PRETRAININGMULTIMODALVIDEOMODEL WITHLATENTACTIONS After obtaining discrete latent actions, we design a pretraining scheme leveraging a powerful multi- modal video prediction model. UniPI trains a video diffusion model and trains an inverse dynamics model (IDM) to recovers actions, while VPT trains an IDM on labeled data to extract pseudo-actions that are then used to pretrain an LWM backbone. LAPA 1-step L 1-step A 53.1 ViPRA-AR FS +H-step LH-step A69.8 –ACFS + 1-step L 1-step A 59.2 –SP2H-step LH-step A 59.4 –LAFS onlyH-step A 60.7 +SP3H-step L FS +H-step A 53.1 ViPRA-FM FS +H-step LH-step A62.5 –ACFS + 1-step L 1-step A 44.8 –SP2H-step LH-step A 53.2 +SP3H-step L FS +H-step A 31.3 Table 2:Ablation study: More- over, we describe training details, hyperparameters, and model architecture for latent action learn- ing in Appendix B, pretraining in Appendix C, and flow matching finetuning in Appendix D. Architecture design, loss formulations, and training protocols for dis- crete latent action codebook learning, including hyperparameter configurations and optimization strategies. Implementation details for extending LWM with latent actions, including embedding architecture, decoder design, and joint training methodology. Specification of noise scheduling, action encoder/decoder architectures, and finetuning procedure. However, this approach typically requires auxiliary losses, such as the codebook and commitment losses, to stabilize training and encourage codebook usage.We adopt the NSVQ formulation (Vali & B¨ackstr¨om, 2022), which replaces the deterministic STE with a stochastic noise-injected surrogate ErrNSVQ =∥z t − ˜ht∥ ·˜ϵ(5) where˜ϵ=ϵ/∥ϵ∥andϵ∼ N(0, I). Crucially, NSVQ enables gradients to flow to both the encoder and codebook using only the reconstruction loss, without requiring additional codebook loss terms. The noise-injected gradient estimator, com- bined with theunused codebook replacementtechnique applied during early training, significantly improves training stability and mitigates codebook collapse, a common issue in VQ-V AE training. A detailed diagram of this procedure is shown in Figure 7, and the complete training configuration–including model architecture and optimization hyperparameters–is provided in Table 5. These features are enriched with clip-level context through factorized spatio-temporal attention layers, where the temporal branch employs bidirec- tional attention to aggregate information across the full sequence. Algorithm 1Latent Action Learning (Training Step) Require:Video clip ofL+1observationso t:t+L ∈R (L+1)×H×W×3 Require:Hyperparameters: LPIPS weightλ LPIPS, Flow weightλ flow, Flow start stepα flow Require:CodebookC ∈R K×D withKcodes of dimensionD 1:// Inverse modelI β comprises of ˜Iβ and NSVQ module 2:Compute contextual embeddings:h t:t+L ← ˜Iβ(ot:t+L) 3:fork= 0toL−1do 4:Quantize embedding to latent:z t+k ←NSVQ(h t+k,C) 5:Decode next frame:ˆo t+k+1 ←F α(ot:t+k, zt:t+k) 6:end for 7: 11:// Optical flow consistency loss 12:ifstep> α flow then 13:L flow ← 1 L LX k=1 ∥OF(ˆot+k