REAL METHOD of "Gen-DFL: Decision-Focused Generative Learning for Robust Decision Making" (arXiv 2502.05468v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Decision-Focused Generative Learning for Robust Decision Making Prince Zizhuang Wang 1 Shuyi Chen 1 Jinhao Liang 2 Ferdinando Fioretto 2 Shixiang Zhu 1 Abstract Decision-focused learning (DFL) integrates pre- dictive models with downstream optimization, di- rectly training machine learning models to mini- mize decision errors. Empirically, we evalu- ate Gen-DFL on various scheduling and logistics problems, demonstrating its strong performance against existing DFL methods. In these settings, decision- makers act with incomplete information and use machine learning predictions to estimate uncertain parameters, such 1Heinz College, Carnegie Mellon University, USA 2Computer Science, University of Virginia, USA. Cost Minimization Generator Backprop Backprop Predict Generate Backprop Backprop Robust Decision Predictor Backprop Predict Predictive Loss Minimization Optimize Decision PTODFLGen-DFL Decision Optimize Optimize Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed decision-focused genera- tive learning Gen-DFL ramework with conventional predict-then- optimize (PTO) and decision-focused learning (DFL). Standard methods, commonly referred to as predict-then- optimize (PTO) (Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2017), tackle this problem by first training a predictive model to estimate the parameters of an optimization problem (e.g., expected de- mand or cost coefficients) and then using these estimates as inputs to an optimization model. Predictive models are typically trained to minimize standard loss functions (e.g., mean squared error), which may not align with the true objective of minimizing decision costs. A common approach, predict-then-optimize (PTO), assumes a linear objective, which simplifies the problem to the fol- lowing deterministic surrogate: To mitigate this issue, decision-focused learning (DFL) (Mandi et al., 2024b) integrates prediction with decision- making by training gθ(x) using decision regret as the loss function. To effectively learn the generative model, we propose a new loss function that integrates both decision-focused learning and generative modeling objectives, ensuring that the gener- ated samples not only reflect the underlying data distribution but also lead to robust, high-quality decisions. Generate-Then-Optimize To solve (5), we introduce a novel generate-then-optimize (GTO) paradigm, which leverages generative modeling to approximate the risk-sensitive optimization problem. Similar to other DFL frameworks, Gen-DFLconsists of two alternating steps: A detailed description of the learning procedure is provided in Algorithm 1 in Appendix C.1. To address this challenge, we introduce an auxiliary model q(c|x), trained on available data to ap- proximate p(c|x). Once learned, q(c|x) remains fixed and serves as a proxy distribution to compute the estimated Regretθ,q(x, α)and the corresponding surrogate loss func- tion ℓ(θ;α, q). The train- ing objective for Gen-DFL can then be formulated as the aggregated regret across all inputs x with an additional reg- ularization term to ensure stability in generative modeling: ℓGen-DFL(θ;q, α):=β·E x[Regretθ,q(x;α)] +γ·ℓ gen(θ), (7) where ℓgen(θ) is the generative model loss (e.g., negative log- likelihood, evidence lower bound (ELBO) for variational autoencoders (Kingma, 2013), or score-matching loss for diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020)). Here, β and γ are hyperparameters that balance the decision-focused regret loss and the generative model loss. The generative loss term ℓgen(θ) acts as a regularization, preventing the learned generative model from deviating excessively from the true data distribution, ensuring reliable sample generation for decision-making during training. Surrogate Loss Function.When training DFL models with respect to the decision loss, it is necessary to back- propagate errors through the decision variable. Inspired by (Mulamba et al., 2020), we propose a surrogate contrastive loss in our Gen-DFL setting to address the challenge of differentiating through the combinatorial optimization mapping: We first derive the bound for the loss difference|ℓ(θ;p, α)− ℓ(θ;q, α)|, comparing the loss function ℓ(θ;p, α) under the ground-truth distribution p(c|x) with the surrogate loss ℓ(θ;q, α) computed using the proxy model q(c|x). The theorem above implies that the surrogate loss provides a valid approximation to the original loss function, pro- vided the proxy model q(c|x) can estimate the ground- truth p(c|x) well. The objective is to minimize the total cost of electricity while adhering to op- erational constraints. We introduce an additional hyperparameter β in our experiment to study how different magnitude of DFL loss will affect the model’s performance. Specifically, we compare against Smart-Predict-Then-Optimize (SPO+) (Elmachtoub & Gri- gas, 2022), contrastive loss-based Pred-DFL models (NCE, MAP) (Mulamba et al., 2020), ranking-based Pred-DFL models (Mandi et al., 2022), and the recently proposed Pred- DFL approach with differentiable Distributionally Robust Optimization layers, which we refer to as Diff-DRO (Ma et al., 2024). These baselines represent a range of decision- focused learning strategies, differing in their loss formula- tions and optimization objectives. For our real data exper- iment, we will first train a proxy model q(c|x) given the data, which will then be used to evaluate the average rel- ative regret during evaluation. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Eval 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.15 0.18 0.20Average Regret (%) Degree 4 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Eval Degree 6 Model Trained by =0.5 =0.75 =1.0 Figure 6.Trainingαvs. Figure 6 shows that models trained with smaller α (e.g., α= 0.5 ) outperform those trained with larger α (e.g., α= 1.0 ), demonstrating better adaptation to adverse outcomes. Robust optimization–a com- prehensive survey.Computer methods in applied mechan- ics and engineering, 196(33-34):3190–3218, 2007. Portfolio optimization with conditional value-at-risk objective and constraints.Journal of risk, 4:43–68, 2002. Going beyond local loss functions for predict- then-optimize, 2024. Surrogate Loss Function In this subsection, we present a theoretical bound on the gap between the loss function ℓ(θ;p, α)under the ground-truth distributionp(c|x)and the surrogate lossℓ(θ;q, α)under a proxy distributionq(c|x)that approximatesp(c|x). Under the assumption that the objective function f(c, w)is Lf -Lipschitz continuous with respect to c for a fixed decision variablew, the gap between the loss functionℓ(θ;p, α)and the surrogate 