REAL METHOD of "Get RICH or Die Scaling: Profitably Trading Inference Compute for Robustness" (arXiv 2510.06790v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

PROFITABLYTRADING INFERENCECOMPUTE FORROBUSTNESS Tavish McDonald∗1 Bo Lei∗1 Stanislav Fort2 Bhavya Kailkhura1 Brian Bartoldson∗1 1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 2Independent Researcher ABSTRACT Test-time reasoning has raised benchmark performances and even shown promise in addressing the historically intractable problem of making models robust to adversarially out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Namely, we posit the Robustness from Inference Compute Hypothesis (RICH): inference-compute defenses profit as the model’s training data better reflects the components of attacked data. Guided by the RICH, we test models of varying initial-robustness levels, finding inference- compute adds robustness even to white-box multimodal attacks, provided the model has sufficient initial robustness. Further evidencing a rich-get-richer dynamic, InternVL 3.5 gpt-oss 20B gains little robustness when its test compute is scaled, but such scaling adds significant robustness if we first robustify its vision encoder (creating the first adversarially robust reasoning VLM in the process). Consistently, we find test-time defenses both build and depend on train-time data and defenses. 1 256 512 1024 2048 Reasoning Tokens 28 30 32 34 36 38 Adversarial Accuracy (%) +4.5 Train-Time Investment ($): Spend Training Compute to Robustify InternVL 3.5's ViT +0.0 +4.0 Test-Time Returns ($$$): Trade Test Compute for Robustness More Profitably InternVL 3.5 gpt-oss-20b + lightweight adversarial finetuning Figure 1:Improvements in base model robustness are amplified by reasoning.We do unsupervised adversarial finetuning of embeddings (Schlarmann et al., 2024) on the ViT in InternVL 3.5 gpt-oss 20B (Wang et al., 2025b). Addressing this gap, we propose a hypothesis that accurately predicts the robustness effects of inference compute across diverse settings, and shows how to trade compute for robustness more profitably. the closer attacked data’s components are to model training data, the more test compute aids robustness. Consistent with this, shrinking the attack budget to move attacked data closer to the training data of less-robust models (facilitating generalization of instruction following) grants inference compute the ability to provide robustness benefits to such models (see Figure 4, bottom). We propose the RICH to explain inference compute’s robustness effect, predicting a rich- get-richer dynamic: The RICH suggests the rate of return when exchanging inference compute for robustness can be improved simply by training (or lightweight finetuning) on attacked data. While robust models may not see explicit specifications at train time, they often do see adversarial attacks and instruction following problems, suggesting compositional generalization (Keysers et al., 2019) drives enforcement of security spec- ifications on adversarially OOD data, and synergy between train-time and test-time defenses. Robustness from Inference Compute Hypothesis (RICH) Inference-compute defenses profit as the model training data better reflects the components of attacked data. models can more efficiently use inference compute to resist strong black-box attacks if they are first robustified, even with lightweight adversarial finetuning (Schlarmann et al., 2024). Section 4.3 finds that, consistent with the RICH, reducing the attack budget ε to bring attacked data components closer to model training data strengthens inference compute’s ability to grant robustness benefits in less-robustified models. This view is also consistent with the RICH, which predicts that the robustness benefits of security-specification-based inference-compute defenses will rise as the components of the attacked data are better represented by model training data. For each step count, we take the lowest loss in a ±10 step window, and report the average (std dev) of 2 replicates. At each step, we record both the cross-entropy loss of the adversary’s target string and whether the model generates the target response. However, if the RICH is correct, security specification enforcement on adversarially OOD data (and its robustness benefit) improves as components of such data are better reflected in the model training data, so the benefit of a security specification would be tied to the degree of relevant adversarial training. Jointly, these results thus provide significant support for the RICH, which states that inference compute’s robustness benefits increase as attacked data components are better represented in the training data. 4.2 PROFITABLYTRADINGINFERENCECOMPUTE FORROBUSTNESS Given the ability to obtain robustness benefits from security specifications on data affected by white- box multimodal attacks, we now consider whether scaling inference compute enhances the robustness benefit of the security specification, as it did in Zaremba et al. At each step, we track both the cross-entropy loss of the attacker’s target tokens and whether the model generates the target response when greedy sampling is used (i.e., whether the attack succeeds). Fewer PGD steps needed for a successful attack and lower loss values both indicate lower robustness. In other words, inference compute increases the difficulty (number of steps needed) of the PGD attack faster if the model’s base robustness increases. These trends are also reflected in the PGD attacker’s loss curves shown in Figure 4 (top left), where we see that increasing inference compute has little effect on the loss at a given PGD step unless the base model is initially robust. Does Inference-Compute Scaling Benefit Models Equally?No, per the RICH, inference- compute scaling benefits robustness more when the model is initially more robust. Alternatively, the RICH suggests that unlocking compositional generalization to adversarially OOD data – by ensuring such data’s components are close enough to model training data – enables enforcement of security specifications and thus robustness benefits of inference compute. Accordingly, FARE-LLaV A-v1.5 may have failed to benefit from inference-compute significantly due to our use of attack budget ε= 64/255, much higher than the ε= 2/255 budget FARE-LLaV A-v1.5 trained with. If test-time compute defenses rely on attacked data’s closeness to training data, we would expect to see test-time scaling’s benefits in less robust models as ε decreases. PGD steps required for a successful attack across models, perturbation budget ε, and inference-compute levels K. This illustrates that nearnes