REAL METHOD of "Learning from Synthetic Data Improves Multi-hop Reasoning" (arXiv 2603.02091v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

high-quality training data with verifiable answers is scarce and expensive to curate, and LLM verifiers are slow and inaccurate (Lambert et al., 2025; Gong et al., 2025). As LLM train- ing outpaces the availability of high-quality human-written text (Villalobos et al., 2024; Muennighoff et al., 2023), the community has responded with synthetic data (Liu et al., 2024)—either distilled from stronger models (Abdin et al., 2025) or generated as augmented reasoning traces (Trinh et al., 2024; Ruan et al., 2025). Both approaches, however, still depend on LLMs and inherit their verifi- cation challenges, high inference cost, and potential for contamination with pretraining corpora (Su et al., 2025). It can be produced at arbitrary scale, on any standard computer, for free. Despite containing no real-world knowledge, training on these datasets teaches models to compose knowledge (center). This fundamental skill of chaining information across multiple steps transfers to real-world multi-hop reasoning benchmarks (right). the elementary skill of integrating in- formation across multiple steps. This is despite the synthetic training data containing no factual knowledge useful to the real-world benchmarks. Recent work suggests that RL fine-tuning could be reinforcing and surfacing memorized pretraining knowledge (Shao et al., 2025; Yue et al., 2025). However, the fictional worlds in rule-generated synthetic data share zero knowledge overlap with reality, and models cannot improve by composing pretraining knowledge. Models extrapolate beyond training knowledge and question complexity levels, suggesting that they bootstrap this skill and generalize, rather than merely memorizing solution patterns. it overfits to the training task rather than teaching a fundamental reasoning skill. Finally, performance on real-world benchmarks scales monotonically with the number of synthetic training samples, with no sign of overfitting (Figure 5). Training and fine-tuning LLMs.LLM performance on reasoning benchmarks can be improved with training or fine-tuning using several classes of techniques. The simplest approach is to train on the datasets directly using supervised fine-tuning (SFT; Lambert et al., 2025) with next-token pre- diction objective. Moreover, as LLMs are trained at internet scale, existing benchmarks become increasingly prone to test-set leakage (Gong et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025c;b). For training LLMs, recent work leverages LLM-generated synthetic data to augment human-curated data (Yang et al., 2025; Goldie et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025; Saad-Falcon et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025). However, LLM-generated data is expensive, inherits verification challenges, and risks con- tamination with pretraining knowledge. Yet whether training on such semantically simple data can teach skills useful for knowledge- intensive real-world reasoning remains underexplored (Yu et al., 2024; Mizrahi et al., 2025; Abbe et al., 2024b;a; Stojanovski et al., 2025). 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3 METHODOLOGY To study reasoning capabilities acquired from synthetic data, we RL fine-tune four LLMs: By covering a range of model families and parameter sizes (0.6 to 4 billion parameters), we control for differences in pre-training and post-training strategies. This helps us isolate the effect of rule-generated synthetic data as the training signal for RLVR. 3.1 SYNTHETICTRAININGDATASETS Recent works in RLVR highlight the need for large datasets with two important characteristics: Scalable verification is essential for on-policy RL algorithms, because the reward function needs to be evaluated on-the-fly. easy questions help the algorithm discover rewards early, while hard questions expand the frontier of reasoning capability. This is valuable for designing LLM training pipelines under resource constraints. We generate from two environments that probe complementary forms of logical reasoning.RG-Family(Family-Relationships) requires inferring the relationship between two individuals in a randomly generated family tree—the inverse of Phan- tomWiki, which infers individuals given a relationship.RG-Knights(Knights-Knaves) requires identifying truth-tellers from liars given a set of logical statements from randomly generated indi- viduals. Where the PPO algorithm estimates the advantage term in its objective using a value model, the GRPO algorithm uses a group of completions for each prompt. 3,4) already underwent extensive training on syn- thetic reasoning data during post-training, yet they still improve with continued RL fine-tuning on rule-generated synthetic data. Performance scales with synthetic data.Recent work scales RL fine-tuning by modifying the RL algorithm, model architecture, and test-time compute (Liu et al., 2025a). Since we train for a single epoch on each synthetic dataset, models see each training sample exactly once. In Figure 5, Qwen3-0.6B steadily improves on all real-world benchmarks with more training steps, or equivalently, more synthetic training data. Performance on all benchmarks improves steadily with training steps—equivalently, with the number of synthetic training samples—providing evidence for synthetic data scaling in RL fine-tuning. Synthetic datasets as meaningful training signals.Our analysis demonstrates that rule-generated synthetic datasets are effectivetrainingsignals: Identifying the boundary conditions for this transfer—when it works, when it fails, and how it interacts with other training objectives—remains an important open (Zhao et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2025c). Authors acknowledge compute resources from the National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource (NAIRR) Pilot, Purdue Anvil AI, and NVIDIA’s DGX Station compute platform through their Early Access Program. Our code is available atgithub.com/kilian-group/phantom-reasoning, where we include our full dataset preparation, model training code, and evaluation configuration (overview in Methodology section and Appendix A). Part 4.1, architecture design and the magic of canon layers, 2025. Then it assigns each output completion a scalar reward value{R 1, . 1 The prompt length varies for each training dataset, and we adjust the max_prompt_lengthto prevent prompt truncation: GRPOTrainer hyperparameter values in our Y AML configuration file Adjusting hyperparameters for large LLMs.Due to memory constraints on our GPU resources, for Phi-4-mini-reasoning and Qwen3-4B LLMs with 4 billion param- eters each, we lower h