REAL METHOD of "RF-DETR: Neural Architecture Search for Real-Time Detection Transformers" (arXiv 2511.09554v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

NEURALARCHITECTURESEARCH FOR REAL-TIMEDETECTIONTRANSFORMERS Isaac Robinson1, Peter Robicheaux1, Matvei Popov1, Deva Ramanan2, Neehar Peri2 1Roboflow, 2Carnegie Mellon University ABSTRACT Open-vocabulary detectors achieve impressive performance on COCO, but of- ten fail to generalize to real-world datasets with out-of-distribution classes not typically found in their pre-training. Rather than simply fine-tuning a heavy- weight vision-language model (VLM) for new domains, we introduce RF-DETR, a light-weight specialist detection transformer that discovers accuracy-latency Pareto curves for any target dataset with weight-sharing neural architecture search (NAS). Our approach fine-tunes a pre-trained base network on a target dataset and evaluates thousands of network configurations with different accuracy-latency tradeoffswithout re-training. In this paper, we modernize specialist detectors by combining internet-scale pre- training with real-time architectures to achieve state-of-the-art performanceandfast inference. Importantly, our approach does not evaluate the search space un- til the base model has been fully-trained on the target dataset. Interestingly, we find that sub-nets not explicitly seen during training still achieve high performance (Appendix F), suggesting that RF-DETR can generalize to unseen architectures. First, we introduce RF-DETR, a family of scheduler-free NAS-based detection and segmentation models that outperform prior state-of-the-art on RF100-VL (Robicheaux et al., 2025) and real-time methods with latencies≤40 ms on COCO (Lin et al., 2014) (Figure 1). 2 RELATEDWORKS Neural Architecture Search (NAS)automatically identifies families of model architectures with different accuracy-latency tradeoffs (Zoph & Le, 2016; Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2018a). However, these methods must repeat the search and training process for each new hardware platform. Recent YOLO variants innovate on architecture, data augmentation, and training techniques (Redmon et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2023; 2024; Jocher et al., 2023; 2024) to improve performance while maintaining fast inference. Notably, the deformable cross-attention layer and segmentation head both bilinearly interpolate the output of the projector, allowing for consistent spatial organization of features. Lastly, we apply detection and segmentation losses at all decoder layers to facilitate decoder drop out at inference. Incorporating Internet-Scale Priors.RF-DETR modernizes LW-DETR (Chen et al., 2024a) by simplifying its architecture and training procedure to improve generalization to diverse target do- mains. Notably, CAEv2’s encoder has 10 layers with a patch size of 16, while DINOv2’s encoder has 12 layers. Lastly, we facilitate training on consumer-grade GPUs via gradient accumulation by using layer norm instead of batch norm in the multi-scale projector. Lastly, we compute the dot product of all projected query token embeddings (at the output of each decoder layer transformed by a FFN) with the pixel embedding map to gener- ate segmentation masks. We vary (a) patch size, (b) number of decoder layers, (c) number of queries, (d) image resolution, and (e) number of windows per attention block when evaluating dif- ferent operating points along RF-DETR’s Pareto curve. In addition to training thousands of network configurations in parallel, we find that this “architecture augmentation” serves as a regularizer and improves generalization. Motivated by LW-DETR’s observation that pre-training improves DETRs, we pre-train RF-DETR-Seg on Objects-365 (Shao et al., 2019) psuedo-labeled with SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2024) instance masks. End-to-End Neural Architecture Search.Our weight-sharing NAS evaluates thousands of model configurations with different input image resolutions, patch sizes, window attention blocks, decoder layers, and query tokens. We find that this weight-sharing NAS approach also serves as a regularizer during training, effec- tively performing “architecture augmentation”. •Number of Decoder Layers.Similar to recent DETRs (Peng et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024), we apply a regression loss to the output of all decoder layers during training. Window attention restricts self- attention to only process a fixed number of neighboring tokens. Notably, prior weight-sharing NAS methods (Cai et al., 2019) train in stages and use a different learning-rate scheduler per-stage. However, such bespoke training procedures implicitly bias the model towards certain dataset char- acteristics (e.g. 4 EXPERIMENTS We evaluate RF-DETR on COCO and RF100-VL and demonstrate that our approach achieves state- of-the-art accuracy among all real-time methods. Notably, replacing batch normalization with layer normalization hurts performance, but is necessary to train on consumer hardware. The lower learning rate, in partic- ular, helps preserve DINOv2’s pre-trained knowledge, while additional epochs of Objects-365 pre- training further compensate for the slower optimization. Impact of Backbone Architecture and Pre-Training.We study the impact of different backbone architectures in RF-DETR. Importantly, the lower learning rate and layer-norm allow us to better preserve DINOv2’s foundational knowledge and allows us to train with larger batch sizes, making weight-sharing NAS more effective. In contrast, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance among all real-time de- tectors on both RF100-VL and COCO, demonstrating the robustness of our weight-sharing NAS. 5 CONCLUSION In this paper, we introduce RF-DETR, a state-of-the-art NAS-based method for fine-tuning special- ist end-to-end object detectors for diverse target datasets and hardware platforms. Our approach outperforms prior state-of-the-art real-time methods on COCO and RF100-VL, improving upon D- FINE (nano) by 5% AP on COCO. We highlight key differences in our training procedure below. First, we pseudo-label Objects-365 (Shao et al., 2019) with SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2024) to allow us to pre-train the segmenta- tion and detection heads on the same data. We clip all gradients greater than 0.1 and apply a per-layer multiplicative decay of 0.8 to preserve information (especially the earlier layers) in the DINOv2 backbone. We place our window attention blocks between layers{0, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10}, while LW-DETR places their window attention blocks between layers{0, 1, 3, 6, 7, 9}. However, RF-DETR can generate all size configurations from this single training run, whil