REAL METHOD of "Gradient-Normalized Smoothness for Optimization with Approximate Hessians" (arXiv 2506.13710v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

arXiv:2506.13710v1 [math.OC] 16 Jun 2025 Gradient-Normalized Smoothness for Optimization with Approximate Hessians Andrei Semenov EPFL andrii.semenov@epfl.ch Martin Jaggi EPFL martin.jaggi@epfl.ch Nikita Doikov EPFL nikita.doikov@epfl.ch Abstract In this work, we develop new optimization algorithms that use approximate second- order information combined with the gradient regularization technique to achieve fast global convergence rates for both convex and non-convex objectives. Importantly, Gradient-Normalized Smoothness does not depend on the specific problem class of the objective functions, while effectively translating local information about the gradient field and Hessian approximation into the global behavior of the method. This new concept equips approximate second-order algorithms with universal global convergence guarantees, recover- ing state-of-the-art rates for functions with Hölder-continuous Hessians and third derivatives, quasi-self-concordant functions, as well as smooth classes in first-order optimization. Numerical optimization methods that use preconditioning or second-order information—such as Newton-type methods—are extensively applied in machine learning, arti- ficial intelligence, and scientific computing. While gradient-based methods—such as Gradient Descent—form a solid foundation for many large-scale applications due to their low per-iteration cost and well-established convergence theory, second-order methods are known to significantly accelerate convergence by taking into account the curvature information of the objective function. In this work, we aim to develop a new convergence theory for second-order methods with approximate Hessians, that matches state-of-the-art rates for the exact Newton method and bridges the geometry of the objective function with conditions on the Hessian approximation. Notably, our method remains formally first-order, relying solely on access to the first-order oracle. In these situation (C1 ≈ 0, C2 > 0, and α ≥ β), our method with inexact Hessians has the same global rate as the full Newton method (C1 = C2 = 0), see Figure 1. We see that, for α ≥ β, the problem class of f dominates the Hessian inexactness, and our method achieves the same rate as full Newton. In this work, we develop a new frame- work for describing the global behavior of second-order methods using a universal (problem-class free) local char- acterization of the objective’s gradient field and Hessian approximation, called Gradient-Normalized Smoothness (Section 2). Our theory provides method (1) with a universal step-size rule for γk, which adapts automatically to the right problem class (which is described by the de- gree of smoothness, 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, introduced in Section 4) and the Hessian approximation error (2). Global complexities for our Algorithm 1 on different problem classes with convex objectives and using inexact Hessian.We show the number of iterations K required to find ε-solution to our problem: Then, by our definition we have γ(x⋆) = + ∞, which means no regularization in our method. This implies that being in a neighborhood of the solution, the algorithm will switch to pure Newton steps, which confirms the intuition that the classical Newton’s method has the best local behavior. It is also interesting to compare our results with several recently proposed general problem classes and algorithms, such as gradient methods for anisotropic smoothness [49], ℓ-smoothness [50, 73], and recent advances on global convergence rates for the damped Newton method [ 38]. In all experiments, our method is run with an adaptive search procedure (see Appendix C), which ensures the inequality (8) and thus selects the best value of γk. 3We emphasize that there is no need for an extensive comparison between Algorithm 1 and variants of the Newton Method with alternative adaptive search procedures, as the practical improvement primarily lies in obtaining a better constant within the adaptive scheme, while the overall convergence pattern remains unchanged. Our goal is to show that our method with inexact Hessian achieves the rate of the full Newton Method and, thus, significantly outperforms the Gradient Method. We show that the Newton Method with Hessian approximation (19) and withγ selected by an adaptive search (Algorithm 3), performs comparably to the Newton Method with the exact Hessian and the same adaptive search procedure, see Figure 6. Thus, according to the results in Table 1, which are also visualized in Figure 1, it places us in the regime where the smoothness of the objective dominates the Hessian inexactness, i.e., we should observe the rate of the full Newton Method for our Algorithm 1 with approximation (19). Our method with approximation noticeably outperforms both Gradient Method and its Gauss-Newton preconditioned variant. Therefore, in this part of our experimental validations, we consider the Exact Newton Method, Gradient Method and the following algorithm xk+1 = xk −  p−2 ∥u(x)∥p ∇f (xk)∇f (xk)⊤ + ∥∇f (xk)∥∗ γk A⊤A −1 ∇f (xk). In Figure 8, we show that our method with the Fisher-type approximation consistently outperforms the Gradient Method and, in some cases, even the Exact Newton Method, while having almost as cheap per-iteration cost as the Gradient Method, especially if the problem is a small dimensional. Throughout those experiments with modifications of p, we observe a consistent improvement of our method with approximation over the Gradient Method and the comparable performance of it compared to the Exact Newton Method. Our method with the inexact Hessian of a Fisher-type form (21) performs comparably to the Exact Newton Method. In this experiment, we compare method (21) with the Exact Newton Method with the Hessian of (20) and the Gradient Method. Our method with the inexact Hessian of a Fisher-type form (21) performs comparably to the Exact Newton Method. As theory suggests, our method should achieve the same convergence rate as the full Newton, which we observe in Figure 10 (b) and in Figure 11 when varying the power p, making the problem harder for the Gradient Method. In particular, both exact and inexact variants of Algorithm 1 perform significantly better than the Gradient Method when p is small enough (Figure 14), but when increasing p (Figure 15), we observe that the Gradient Method also starts to perform better. With such an approximation our method is in the regime where it has the same convergence as the Newton Method with the