REAL METHOD of "D-REX: Differentiable Real-to-Sim-to-Real Engine for Learning Dexterous Grasping" (arXiv 2603.01151v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Through optimizing the mass of the manipulated object, our method automatically builds high-fidelity and physically plausible digital twins. Additionally, we propose a novel learning-based method for dexterous manipulation, where we transfer human demonstrations into simulation-executable robot demonstrations, then utilize the proposed method to optimize the grasp position and force simultaneously. into robot-executable trajectories {At}T t=1 using our proposed method and are used to train a force- aware manipulation policyπ. 4 METHODS We propose a real-to-sim-to-real framework that constructs accurate simulation environments and identifies object mass via system identification using a differentiable engine from visual observations and robot control signals, enabling robust policy learning and sim-to-real transfer. Finally, these trajectories are used to train a policy in simulation, which is then deployed in the real world directly. To quantify the discrepancy between simulated and real-world trajectories, we define the trajectory loss between the simulated state ssim t and the corresponding real-world states real t as: Importantly, our method does not require ground-truth object mass or contact points. πϕ(o) =   ˆA ˆr ˆf   ∈R 19, ˆf= m·g nactive .(10) where ˆA∈R 16 denotes the predicted joint positions, ˆr∈R 2 represents the contact constraint, and ˆf∈R denotes the grasping force constraint. The network uses fully connected layers with ReLU activations, followed by a pooling layer. Force-Aware Optimization Design.At training onset, we define a two-dimensional contact con- straint ˆr: ∀t∈[t 0, t0 +H] :n active(t)≥N min,I in_hand(t) = 1,ifn active(t)≥1, 0,otherwise, (11) 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 We subsequently retrain the manipulation policy with the force-based constraint in 10, enabling adaptive force control that responds to object mass variations Vassiliadis et al. To address this, we propose a hybrid control framework that combines position and force control, using a prediction module conditioned on the optimized mass m. Our method accurately recovers mass in both cases, demonstrating generalization to diverse shapes and sensitivity to subtle physical differences. Our method accurately estimates mass in both settings, demonstrating robustness to shape and density variations. Policies trained with object mass consistently outperform those trained on mismatched masses, and policies conditioned on automatically identified mass achieve comparable performance to those using ground-truth values. As shown in Figure 7, our method consistently outperforms the baselines across eight objects with diverse geometries and masses, achieving high success rates with substantially lower variance. Unlike traditional methods that rely on continuous volumes or polygonal meshes, particle-based methods discretize objects into numerous discrete particles, each endowed with physical attributes such as massmi, position xi, and velocity vi, as well as material properties including elasticity, friction, and damping. Unlike traditional force-based methods that compute motion by integrating forces and torques explicitly, PBD enforces physical consistency by iteratively projecting particle positions to satisfy a set of predefined geometric and physical constraints. For each particlei, the translational motion is computed as: Constraint Projection Step.Once predicted states are available, positional constraints are enforced through iterative corrections. For constraint satisfaction, the positional update is computed as: Velocity Update Step.After the constraints are enforced, particle velocities are updated to reflect the corrected positions: The pipeline then trains two disjoint ensembles of Gaussian primitives, each pursuing a separate objective. This ensemble is trained with depth distortion and normal consistency terms for geometric accuracy, remaining untouched by photometric loss. We then align the reconstructed Gaussian coordinate frame and chirality with MuJoCo’s convention, following the transformation procedure described in Lou et al. The dynamics residual is evaluated at discrete time steps {tk}T k=1 along the observed trajectory, with contact forces computed from the mesh vertices of the Gaussian-splatting reconstruction. , T.(24) The trajectory loss we use, Ltraj(m) = TX k=1 zk(m)−ˆzk 2 ,(25) then becomes a standard least-squares problem in the parameter θ= 1/m . Semi-implicit Euler, on the other hand, updates the velocity first and then uses the updated velocity to advance the position, which empirically leads to more stable and accurate trajectories. Algorithm 1Force-Aware Policy Training Input:Set of object meshes and masses:{(K i,M i)}N i=1 Output:Learned actions and forces:{(Action i,F orcei)}N i=1 1:foreach demonstration(K i,M i)do 2: Dataset Construction:Prepare training batches comprising encoded vertices, object mass Mi, and ground-truth actions. Stage One Training (Supervised):Train the policy network by setting force and contact head ground-truth labels to1, optimizing initial grasp prediction. A.2.5 IMPLEMENTATION OFD-REX’SGRASPINGPOLICY Table 6 details the neural network architecture used in ourGraspMLP, while Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 describe the training pipeline. A.2.6 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS OF THEFORCE-BASEDGRASPINGPOLICY For the grasp-position policy, we use a two-stage training procedure that combines human demonstra- tions with simulation-based refinement (see Appendix A.2.4 for additional details). Our grasping policy, denotedGraspMLP, is first trained on human data and subsequently refined in simulation. Input representation and supervision from human demonstrations.We begin by collect- ing human grasp demonstrations and reconstructing the human hand and object poses using 25 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 2Two-phase Training Procedure 1: , E1 do 4:forbatch(x, a, r, f)∼ Ddo 5:Compute predictions:(ˆa,ˆr, ˆf)←model(x;θ) 6:Compute losses: , E2 do 16:forbatchx∼ Ddo 17:Predict actions and rewards:(ˆa,ˆr, ˆf)←model(x;θ) 18:Executeˆain environmentEand observe rewardsr env and contact-based forcesf env 19:Compute scaled ground-truth force:f env =clip( m·g·num_contacts fmax ,0,1) 20:Compute losses: Network architecture.GraspMLP consists of a shared MLP backbone that processes the mass- conditioned per-vertex features, followed by three task-specific heads: The full architecture (layer widths and activations) is summarized in 