REAL METHOD of "Self-Improving Loops for Visual Robotic Planning" (arXiv 2506.06658v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 SELF-IMPROVINGLOOPS FORVISUALROBOTICPLANNING Calvin Luo*,1 , Zilai Zeng*,1, Mingxi Jia1, Yilun Du2, Chen Sun1 1Brown University, 2Harvard University ABSTRACT Video generative models trained on expert demonstrations have been utilized as performant text-conditioned visual planners for solving robotic tasks. We ap- ply SILVR to a diverse suite of MetaWorld tasks, as well as two manipulation tasks on a real robot arm, and find that performance improvements continuously emerge over multiple iterations for novel tasks unseen during initial in-domain video model training. Intu- itively, the data on which the video generative models and the IDMs are trained can greatly impact robotic performance and generalization. Adapt2Act (Luo et al., 2025) creates a powerful, generalizable, text-conditioned visual planner by combining a large-scale model pretrained on web-scale video data with a video model trained on a small set of in-domain demonstrations via score composition. At a high level, the adapted video model draws upon large-scale motion priors and powerful zero-shot text conditioning capabilities from the web-pretrained video model to facilitate generalization. one pretrained generally on internet-scale data and another pretrained on a general set of in-domain demonstrations. These trajectories are then iteratively fed back to finetune the in-domain model (right), thus improving the overall quality of future visual planning as a whole through self-collected online experience. SILVR can optionally incorporate internet-scale pretrained video models as prior, which particularly improves performance in the case of real-world robotic experiments. SILVR utilizes a sparse reward signal to filter online experience for further finetuning of the visual planner; however, it is quite natural to consider alternative methods beyond visual planning or direct finetuning of the generative model. SILVR is also robust to the quality of the sparse reward signal; rather than requiring a human-defined ground-truth success function, we demonstrate that iterative improvements still arise when utilizing a pretrained vision-language model (VLM) to score experience based on the task descriptions. To summarize, SILVR enables superior sample-efficient self-improvement over initially unseen tasks through visual planning, naturally integrating internet-scale pretrained video priors over text- alignment and motion when necessary, in comparison to regular action-prediction policies. We perform extensive evaluations of SILVR on the MetaWorld task suite, focusing on novel tasks unseen during initial training of the in-domain video model. We show how SILVR also naturally enables the incorporation of priors from internet-scale pretrained video generative models to facilitate task and visual generalization in real-world visual settings and dynamics. We demonstrate that performance for color combinations unseen during the initial offline training improves over multiple iterations through SILVR. While the performance of such visual planners may often be limited by their offline pretraining data, our approach allows iterative improvement by learning from online environment interactions. We instead base our improvement loop on self-adaptation, where we leverage internet-scale video priors to synthesize improved visual plans for tasks unseen during initial in-domain training. Furthermore, our approach can still achieve self-improvement even with an initial model trained on suboptimal data and a notable relaxation on filtering requirements for finetuning data. Reinforcement Learning Finetuning of Behavior Cloning Policies.Behavior cloning approaches such as Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023), which implements a policy as a diffusion model trained on offline-collected experience, are a performant approach for decision-making. There have been numerous approaches for finetuning pretrained diffusion policies with respect to online experience and rewards. DPPO (Ren et al., 2024) treats the sampling procedure of a diffusion policy as an internal Markov Decision Process, and explicitly finetunes the weights of the pretrained diffusion policy with respect to achieved rewards. 3 METHOD We introduce the Self-Improving Loop for Visual Robotic Planning (SILVR), in which a video gen- erative model initially trained on a general set of in-domain demonstrations iteratively improves its visual planning performance for a particular task of interest in a self-adaptive manner. In Section 3.2, we describe how a small in-domain video model can be integrated with a generally pretrained text- to-video model to produce a strong, generalizable in-domain visual planner for real-world visual settings. Inverse Probabilistic Adaptation (Luo et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2023a) (IPA) is a training-free approach that adapts generally pretrained text-to-video models for domain- specific video generation. To perform adaptation, the score predicted by an in-domain video model ϵθ trained on a small sample of demonstrations is composed with the score prediction of a web-scale pretrained modelϵ general during the sampling procedure, as depicted in the function below: The video model is utilized as a visual planner to interact with the environment and solve tasks not necessarily observed in the initial training stage; in SILVR, the trajectories collected through this interaction are used for further finetuning of the in-domain video model (as shown in Algorithm 1). For MetaWorld experiments, we first collect 25 demonstrations from 8 different tasks (denoted with an asterisk in Table A2) for initial in-domain video model and inverse dynamics model training. This translates to 12 possible unique tasks formed from combinations of the seen colors, and we train our in-domain video model with 10 human-teleoperated demonstrations of each for a total of 120 training videos. With 24 possible drawer placement combinations for each ordered pair of seen colors, of which there are six, this amounts to a total of 144 human-teleoperated demonstration training videos. Implementation Details:We implement our in-domain video model based on A VDC (Ko et al., 2024), with an added cross-attention layer to each level of the denoising U-Net to further improve text-conditioning capabilities. For the large-scale pretrained text-to-video model, we use AnimateD- iff (Guo et al., 2023) (∼2B parameters), which is pretrained on WebVid-10M (Bain et al.,