REAL METHOD of "Exploiting Low-Dimensional Manifold of Features for Few-shot Whole Slide Image Classification" (arXiv 2505.15504v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this, we propose the Manifold Residual (MR) block, a plug-and-play module that is explicitly geometry-aware. Feature geometric analysis reveals a low-dimensional manifold, which linear layers distort and our method preserves. 1(d), a trained linear layer (Vanilla Linear in the figure) severely distorts the intrinsic geometry of the manifold compared to the original (blue line). Consequently, especially under the few-shot setting, these linear layers are prone to learning an overly complex mapping that does not respect the low-rank nature of features and distorts their structure, thereby discarding the geometric priors that the pathology foundation models learned during large-scale pretraining. We conduct extensive experiments, including comparative experiments, ablation studies, and sensitivity analyses, to validate both the efficacy and efficiency of our method. 2 RELATEDWORK 2.1 MULTIPLEINSTANCELEARNING In MIL, WSIs are tessellated into patches, which are then input into a pretrained neural network to obtain features. In the instance- level paradigm, logits are first computed for each patch and then aggregated to yield a slide-level prediction (Campanella et al., 2019; Chikontwe et al., 2020; Hou et al., 2016; Kanavati et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2025). Instead, MR is inserted into internal linear layers of the MIL backbone, where our tangent space analysis reveals substantial distortion of the low-dimensional manifold of pretrained pathology features. The geometric properties of this learned manifold are shaped by the pretraining objectives, for instance, contrastive methods like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) encourage a topology of well-separated semantic clusters (Tian et al., 2021); self-distillation approaches like DINO (Oquab et al., 2024) preserve fine-grained local structures; while supervised learning often prioritizes linear separability. 3 METHODOLOGY We first formalize the bag-level MIL setting and introduce the geometric tools used to probe the feature manifold of the pathology foundation models, and then detail the Manifold Residual block, mitigating manifold degradation while enabling parameter-efficient task-specific adaptation. A pretrained feature extractor then encodes each patch into a feature vector fi ∈R dp, where dp is the output dimension. Notably, most modern MIL models employ attention pooling to compute f, which simultaneously yields both the bag feature and interpretable importance scores for each patch. In practice, a single geometric statistic cannot reliably forecast the exact improvement on each dataset and backbone, because the final performance also depends on various other factors, such as architecture design, which layers are replaced, label difficulty, and the number of shots. Therefore, we only use these metrics to describe how vanilla linear layers and our MR block transform the pretrained feature manifold, rather than as dataset-level performance predictors. We first detail its architecture, and then its empirical motivation and theoretical guarantees. 3.2.1 ARCHITECTURE To mitigate the geometric degradation introduced by a vanilla linear layer, we introduce the MR block, a parameter-efficient, plug-and-play substitute that is explicitly geometry-aware. During training, the LRP is activated only if it improves the training objective. For any r <(d0d1)/(d0 +d 1), the trainable parameter count of LRP, r(d0 +d 1), is strictly fewer than that of a vanilla linear layer (d0d1), theoretically reducing the risk of overfitting (see Sec. This nonzero curvature indicates a curved, nonlinear manifold geometry that a trained linear layer fails to preserve. Experimental results comparing our method with baselines are presented under various shot settings. Performance metrics in which our method outperforms the baseline are highlighted in italic blue and the best metrics are in bold red. if the MR block cannot improve over the linear layer then it can match behavior of the target optimal linear layer arbitrarily closely, ensuring no loss in worst-case performance. Implementation Details.To ensure a fair and robust comparison, we use a consistent set of hyperparameters and training and evaluation protocols for all methods, as detailed in Sec. an unconstrained linear layer tends to shatter the feature manifold, whereas our design preserves it. Capacity-Matched Analysis of MR Block Effects.To disentangle parameter reduction from the geometric inductive bias introduced by our MR block, we construct a capacity-matched MR-ABMIL in which the MR block has exactly the same number of trainable parameters as the original gated attention layer in ABMIL; the results are reported in Table 3. For a gated attention layer with input dimension d0 = 512 and output dimension d1 = 256, we set the rank tor= (d 0d1)/(d0 +d1) = 170, so that MR and the vanilla linear layer are exactly matched in parameter count. Layer-wise Performance Analysis.We conducted a layer-wise ablation study to evaluate how our method affects performance when implemented at different layers within MIL. The results demonstrate that optimal performance is achieved when both components are replaced with our MR block, and our method is robust to positions in MIL. The results in Tables 5 and 11 demonstrate that our method is broadly insensitive to the specific choice of initialization. Our method demonstrated consistent improvements over baselines across all model combinations, substan- tiating its robustness across diverse MIL and foundation models. Notably, our method captures additional fine-grained boundaries not presented in the original annotations, as shown in the right panel. We proposed the Manifold Residual block, a plug-and-play module that preserves this geometry via a fixed random geometric anchor while enabling parameter-efficient, task-specific adaptation through a low-rank residual path. Rethinking pre-training and self-training.Advances in neural information processing systems, 33: C COMPLEXITYANALYSIS C.1 SPACECOMPLEXITYANALYSIS In the linear layer, the matrix A∗ contains d0d1 trainable parameters; however, in our approach, as B is frozen, the only trainable part is LRP, with (d0 +d 1)r trainable parameters. If rr ≥1 , the trainable parameter count in the MR block would match or exceed d0d1, the trainable parameter count inA ∗, which makes our MR block meaningless. C.2 TIMECOMPLEXITYANALYSIS We begin by analyzing a general case time complexity and then use the result to analyze ou