REAL METHOD of "NextStep-1: Toward Autoregressive Image Generation with Continuous Tokens at Scale" (arXiv 2508.10711v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Toward Autoregressive Image Generation with Continuous Tokens at Scale NextStep-Team, StepFun Homepage: NextStep-1 Collections Abstract Prevailing autoregressive (AR) models for text-to-image generation either rely on heavy, computationally-intensive diffusion models to process continuous image tokens, or employ vector quantization (VQ) to obtain discrete tokens with quantization loss. In this paper, we push the autoregressive paradigm forward with NextStep-1, a 14B autoregressive model paired with a 157M flow matching head, training on discrete text tokens and continuous image tokens with next-token prediction objectives. NextStep-1 achieves state-of-the-art performance for autoregressive models in text-to-image generation tasks, exhibiting strong capabilities in high- fidelity image synthesis. Furthermore, our method shows strong performance in image editing, highlighting the power and versatility of our unified approach. While recent efforts with continuous latent representations (Fan et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024c; Sun et al., 2024c; Tschannen et al., 2024, 2025) have shown promise, a significant performance gap persists between autoregressive models and state-of-the-art diffusion methods (Esser et al., 2024; Labs, 2024; Podell et al., 2024), particularly in image quality and consistency. In this paper, we introduce NextStep-1, a simple yet effective autoregressive model built on the next-token prediction paradigm that achieves state-of-the-art performance in text-to- image generation tasks. Specifically, NextStep-1 demonstrates exceptional compositional and linguistic understanding, achieving 0.54 on WISE (Niu et al., 2025), 0.67 on the advanced prompts of GenAI-Bench (Lin et al., 2024), 85.28 on DPG-Bench (Hu et al., 2024), and 0.417 on the English prompts of OneIG-Bench (Chang et al., 2025). 2 Text Tokenizer Image Tokenizer Flow Matching HeadLM Head dog on rock [bos] dog on rock …… [eoi] Causal Transformer …… …… …… …… Next Token Prediction …… [boi] [eoi] Flow Matching HeadTarget Patch Noise Sample 𝑡 1−𝑡 Patch-Wise Flow Matching Hidden State Mean Square ErrorVelocityPrediction TargetFlow Figure 2| Overview of NextStep-1 Framework. NextStep-1 employs a causal transformer to process tokenized text and image tokens. During training, Flow Matching Head predicts the continuous flow from a noise sample to the next target image patch, conditioned on the output hidden state. Beyond generation, the versatility of NextStep-1 is validated by its strong performance on instruction-based image editing, NextStep-1-Edit, achieving competitive scores of 6.58 for English prompts on GEdit-Bench (Liu et al., 2025) and 3.71 on ImgEdit- Bench (Ye et al., 2025). NextStep-1 is a 14-billion-parameter autoregressive model composed of a Transformer back- bone, a standard language modeling head for discrete text tokens, a lightweight flow matching head for continuous image tokens, and an image tokenizer. The flow matching head is a 157- million-parameter, MLP-based model trained with a flow matching objective, following the approach of (Li et al., 2024c). In autoregressive modeling, high-dimensional latent spaces are critical for achieving high image quality but often induce training instability and divergence. Empirical results confirm that this design is essential for stable and effective training with 16-channel latents. Unified Multi-model Generation with Continuous Visual Tokens NextStep-1 extends the well-established autoregressive language modeling paradigm to image generation through a simple and intuitive architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 3 Our training objective consists of two distinct losses: a standard cross-entropy loss for discrete text tokens, and a flow matching loss (Lipman et al., 2023b) for continuous image tokens. The model is trained end-to-end by optimizing a weighted sum of these two losses: The tokenizer first encodes an image into 16-channel latents 𝑧, applying an 8× spatial downsampling factor. Then the output hidden states from LLM are passed to two lightweight heads for modality- specific loss: We compute Cross-Entropy loss for hidden states of texts. Following (Li et al., 2024c), we use each patch-wise image hidden states as condition, denoise target patch at timesteps t, and compute the patch-wise flow-matching loss (Lipman et al., 2023a) with a 157M, 12-layer, and 1536 hidden-dimensions MLP . Text-only Corpus To preserve the extensive language capabilities inherent in the large language model (LLM), we incorporate 400B text-only tokens sampled from Step-3 (Wang et al., 2025a) during training. After deduplicating the filtered images, we used the Step-1o-turbo 1 to generate rich and detailed captions for each image in both English and Chinese. Following Step1X-Edit (Liu et al., 2025), all editing data were subjected to a rigorous VLM-based filtering pipeline that assessed both image-pair quality, rationality, consistency, and instruction alignment, resulting in about1M high-quality instruction-guided image-to-image data for training. 1https://platform.stepfun.com/docs/llm/vision 5 Web data collection Coarse filtering Face detection & character binding Frame extraction & MLLM captioning Frame extraction & MLLM captioning Step I: The model is trained for 50K steps with a total batch size of 512, using a constant learning rate of 1× 10−5 preceded by a linear warm-up of 1000 steps. Pre-Training Post-Training Stage1 Stage2 Annealing SFT DPO Hyperparameters Learning Rate (Min, Max) 1× 10−4 1× 10−5 (0, 1× 10−5) (0, 1 × 10−5) 2 × 10−6 LR Scheduler Constant Constant Cosine Cosine Constant Weight Decay 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Loss Weight (CE : Pre-Training The specific hyperparameters and data ratios for our pre-training are detailed in Tab. Throughout these stages, all model parameters are trained end-to-end except for the pre-trained image tokenizer. Post-Training Following pre-training on a broad corpus to establish a generalist model, post-training serves to align the model’s output with human preferences and downstream tasks. To enhance the model’s reasoning capabilities, we introduce an explicit reasoning step. For each prompt𝑐, we first prompt our model to generate a detailed textual CoT, which is then extended to the original prompt. We developed NextStep-1-Edit by finetuning NextStep-1 on 1M high-quality edit-only data in Sec. an autoregressive model first produces a semantic embedding, which is then used to condition a diffusion model that generates an entire image in a 