REAL METHOD of "When would Vision-Proprioception Policies Fail in Robotic Manipulation?" (arXiv 2602.12032v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Further analysis reveals that the policy naturally gravitates toward concise proprioceptive signals that offer faster loss reduction when training, thereby dominating the optimization and suppressing the learning of the visual modality during motion-transition phases. To alleviate this, we propose the Gradient Adjustment with Phase-guidance (GAP) algorithm that adaptively modulates the optimization of proprioception, enabling dynamic collaboration within the vision-proprioception policy. Specifically, we leverage proprioception to capture robotic states and estimate the probability of each timestep in the trajectory belonging to motion-transition phases. HPT [ 8] demonstrated clear improvements under the joint utilization of vision and proprioception, while Octo [9] observed policies trained with additional propioception seemed generally worse than vision-only policies. Concretely, we execute the “assembly” task using the vision-only policy, but for a specific 10-timestep period, we replace executed actions with those predicted by the vision-proprioception policy under the same observations. As a result, the vision-proprioception policy naturally gravitates toward the more concise proprioceptive signals to minimize the training loss, thereby dominating the optimization [14, 15]. To alleviate this, we propose the Gradient Adjustment with Phase-guidance (GAP) algorithm that adaptively modulates the optimization of proprioception. Specifically, we first define the motion of the robot using concise proprioception signals and segment the trajectory into motion-consistent phases. It helps eliminate potential errors introduced by the segmentation and estimates the probability that each timestep belongs to motion-transition phases. In this study, we introduce the modality-temporality perspective to understand the roles of vision and propriocetion and propose the gradient adjustment algorithm to enhance dynamic collaboration within the vision-proprioception policy. In vanilla BC, L typically represents the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss for continuous action spaces, or Cross-Entropy (CE) loss for discrete action spaces. To support our analysis under this fusion approach, we split the first layer of MLP-based policy head ψ into ψs, ψv and rewrite the action prediction as: As a result, the vision-proprioception policy naturally gravitates toward proprioceptive signals to minimize the training loss. 4 Method To alleviate the suppression of the learning of vision modality during motion-transition phases, we propose the Gradient Adjustment with Phase-guidance (GAP) algorithm. Motion-transition phase indicators are then predicted to estimate the probability that each timestep belongs to motion-transition phases. Specifically, the motion between timestep i and timestep j is defined as: 4.3 Gradient Adjustment for Modality Collaboration The vision-proprioception policy extracts features from both vision and proprioception modalities using two separate chunks ϕv, ϕs, which consist of an encoder and a temporal transformer, these features are then fused and fed into policy head to predict the action. For each timestep, we modulate the magnitude of the proprioception backward gradient based on its indicator ρ of belonging to motion-transition phases. For each task, our proposed GAP algorithm enhances the generalization of the vision-proprioception policies. This demonstrates that our method accurately captures motion transitions during the robot’s operation. 6.2 Visualization of Loss Curves Furthermore, we demonstrate the effect of GAP on the loss curves of vision-proprioception policy in Figure 6. Due to the adjustment of GAP to the gradient updates for proprioceptive parameters, the loss decreases more slowly during the early and middle stages of training. loss with GAPoriginal loss Task “threading” Task “assembly” Figure 6Visualization of loss curves. To alleviate this, we propose the Gradient Adjustment with Phase-guidance (GAP) algorithm, enabling dynamic collaboration between vision and proprioception. For the visual input, spatial features are first extracted using a ResNet-18 [ 35] backbone, then projected into a 512-dimensional hidden representation. These features are fused via concatenation and then passed through a 3-layer MLP to output a sequence of actions of length L= 9 . To alleviate this, we propose the Gradient Adjustment with Phase-guidance (GAP) algorithm, enabling dynamic collaboration between vision and proprioception within vision-proprioception policy. First, we kept other components unchanged and tested the impact of different trajectory decomposition methods on policy learning. This experiment highlights that our method offers an effective and efficient approach, given that obtaining ground truth phase transition labels is infeasible due to the complexity and diversity of manipulation tasks. The results show that policies using a diffusion-based policy head are generally better those with MLP-based heads, while applying the GAP method still outperforms vision-only policies and other methods. Method Task assembly bin-picking threading Vision-only 88% 71% 50% Concatenation 78% 50% 37% GAP 94% 82% 61% The results in Table 16 demonstrate that policies trained with online learning are more robust, and GAP can be effectively applied to on-policy updates across different tasks and environments. The robot arm first needs to locate the position of the cylinder, then move toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the part, then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the part, then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the cylinder, then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the green cube, then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the drawer and then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the red cube and then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the pin and then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the button, then moves toward it, closes the gripper, and presses the button. The robot arm first locates the position of the cube, then moves toward it. The robot arm first locates the position of the rag, then moves toward the rag. The robot first locates the position of the rectangular block, then its right arm moves toward it. The robot first locates the position of the bag, then its right arm moves toward it, li