REAL METHOD of "VER: Vision Expert Transformer for Robot Learning via Foundation Distillation and Dynamic Routing" (arXiv 2510.05213v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We then fine- tune only a lightweight routing network (fewer than 0.4% of parameters) to dy- namically select task-relevant experts from the pretrained library for downstream robot tasks. 1 arXiv:2510.05213v2 [cs.RO] 14 May 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Figure 1:A comparison between our VER and previous distillation framework.Our method not only enhances knowledge distillation from vision foundation models (VFMs) into vision experts but also offers two key advantages over previous works (Ranzinger et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2024). First, VER trains a lightweight router that dynamically selects vision experts for downstream robot policies. Our method operates in three stages as shown in Fig. First, during pretraining, we distill knowl- edge from multiple VFMs into a vision expert library using Teacher-Specific Routers with mutual- information regularization. Second, in the robotic policy learning phase, we freeze all pretrained vision experts and fine-tune only a lightweight Robot Router that dynamically selects task-relevant experts, whose outputs are fed to a policy head to generate actions. (1) Pretraining, where we distill multiple foundation models (DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024), ViT (Caron et al., 2021), CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) into VER; (2) Downstream Robotic Tasks, where we freeze the experts and train a lightweight Robot Router (<0.4%parameters) that dynamically selects task-relevant visual features to guide the policy head in generating appropriate robotic actions. 2.2 MIXTURE OFEXPERTS INVISION ANDPOLICY Mixture of Experts (MoE) architectures (Shazeer et al., 2017a; Fedus et al., 2022; Riquelme et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024) have gained popularity for their ability to scale model capacity without proportional increases in computational costs by activating only a subset of expert networks for each input. Recent approaches have leveraged pre-trained vi- sion models to improve sample efficiency and generalization (Nair et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2022; Radosavovic et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025; Kim et al.; Black et al., 2024), but typically use fixed visual encoders that may not capture optimal representations for specific tasks. Current methods using attention mechanisms (Luo et al., 2023) or feature selection (Jiang et al., 2025) often lack the flexibility to incorporate diverse visual expertise from foundation models. We design VER based on a modified vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) architecture, where the FeedForward Network in the lastNtransformer layers is replaced with Mixture of Experts (MoE) (Shazeer et al., 2017b) modules. The initial unaltered ViT layers are referred to as BVT, while the MoE-enhanced later layers constitute the VEL. In then-th MoE layer (Shazeer et al., 2017b) of VEL, wheren∈ {1,2, ..., N}, we incorporateL experts{E n l }L l=1, each implemented as a multilayer perceptron (MLP). We then introduce Teacher- Specific (TS) RoutersR n i , wherei∈1,2, ..., Icorresponds to each teacher vision foundation model. TS RouterR n i takes in the input feature vectorx∈R 1×M and learn a MLP to determine the score for each expert, as well as score noise. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3.3 DISTILLATIONTRAINING Building on our network architecture, we now describe the distillation process that enables our model to acquire diverse visual representations from multiple VFMs, forming a comprehensive li- brary of specialized vision experts for effective utilization in downstream robot tasks. Given an input imagex, the BVTf(·)first processes the image to produce a unified rich representa- tionz=f(x). Following (Shang et al., 2024), we formulate the distillation lossL distill as a weighted combination of cosine and smooth L1 losses: To mitigate optimization conflicts and ensure balanced expert utilization when distilling multiple Vi- sion Foundation Models (VFMs), we introduce a teacher-level mutual information loss (Wang et al., 2024). Unlike standard token-level load-balancing heuristics, this objective explicitly maximizes the mutual information between the categorical teacher variableIand the routed expertsE n across all MoE layers: Second, minimizing the conditional entropyH(E n | I) enforces teacher-specific specialization by minimizing the uncertainty of expert assignment given a specific teacherI i. We introduce a lightweight robot routerR n robot that selects task-relevant vision experts and feeds the resulting representations to a newly trained policy head to produce actions. Our approach (VER) outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods across 11 diverse tasks from Franka Kitchen (Gupta et al., 2020), Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020), and Adroit (Rajeswaran et al., 2018) environments, achieving the highest average success rate (74.7%). Specifically, for each image/frametand layern, the robot routerR n robot produces a categorical distributionπ t,n ∈∆ M−1 over{R n i }M i=1. The selected TS router at layernis then used to select among the experts{E n ℓ }L ℓ=1 in that layer. We can share teacher logits across layers within a frame, i.e.,π t,n ≡π t, yielding a single teacher choice per frame; or allow per-layer logitsπ t,n so that shallow and deep layers route to different teachers (e.g., DINOv2- like early, CLIP-like late) for finer control. Proposition 1(Router Gradient in Top-K MoE).LetLbe the task loss. The gradient of the loss with respect to the router logitz l is given by: We initialize training with all experts active (K0 =L) and linearly anneal the number of active experts down to a targetK min overStraining steps: To con- trol complexity, VER replaces only thelast three layersof a 12-layer transformer with the Vision Expert Library, yielding 9 standard transformer layers for theBase Vision TransformerandN= 3 MoE layers for theVision Expert Library. Details of the pretraining procedure are provided in Appendix D. Instead of pre-assigning experts to teacher models, our Teacher- Specific Routers dynamically allocate them, with mutual information regularization encouraging di- verse expert usage. This trend is confirmed in Table 8, where the cosine loss after pretraining is significantly lower for ViT than for DINOv2 and CLIP. Overall, these findings demonstrate that our method outperforms fixed expert assignments by adaptively allocating more experts to stronger foundation models and fewer to weaker ones, thereby improving both utilization and distillation performance. 4.4 ABLATION ONROUTERDYNAMICS INRO