REAL METHOD of "Collaborative Gym: A Framework for Enabling and Evaluating Human-Agent Collaboration" (arXiv 2412.15701v6). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

returns =data[ 'close'].pct_change().dropna() * 100 model = arch_model(returns, vol= 'Garch', p=1, q=1) model_fit = model.fit(disp= 'off') print(f'GARCH Model Summary for {name}:') print(model_fit.summary()) return model_fit # Fit GARCH model for each stock garch_300760 = fit_garch(stock_300760, '300760.XSHE' ) garch_000796 = fit_garch(stock_000796, '000796.XSHE' ) OUT [11]: No module named 'arch' WaitTeammateContinue We don’t need the intro part. To address these gaps, we introduceCollaborative Gym (Co-Gym), the first framework for devel- oping and evaluating agents that can engage in bidirectional communication with humans while in- teracting with task environments. Co-Gym imposes no constraints on agent implementation but instead defines an environment interface that supports dual control in a shared workspace. • We introduce Collaborative Gym (Co-Gym), the first framework for enabling and evalu- ating human-agent collaboration with dual control over task environments and non-turn- 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 taking interaction. At each step, users can pause, reject, or take alternative actions, providing a valuable testbed for studying human-agent coordination in naviga- tion tasks. In contrast, Co-Gym relaxes the turn-taking constraint through a coordination protocol with collaboration acts and notifications, allowing humans and agents to act asynchronously when needed. These evaluations typically involve single-step user instructions and binary task outcomes, without considering qualitative aspects of performance. 3.1 TASKENVIRONMENT Within Co-Gym, we define each task as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP)(S,A,T,R,U,O)with state spaceS, action spaceA, transition functionT:S × A → S, reward functionR:S × A →R, instruction spaceU, and an observation spaceO. {…} for team_member in self.team_members} } # observation with public and private elements def step(self, role, action): """obs, reward, done, private = env.step(role, action)"""Collaboration Acts (shared across task environments) collaboration_acts = MultiSpace(( Action( name="Send a message to your teammate", description="…", regex_pattern="SEND_TEAMMATE_MESSAGE(message=(.*))" ), Action( name="Wait for your teammate to continue", description="…", regex_pattern="WAIT_TEAMMATE_CONTINUE()" ), )) # meta actions for collaborationNotification Protocol (shared across task environments) async def event_loop(self): To support actions from both humans and agents within a shared task environment,CoEnvintro- duces aroleparameter in itsstepfunction, which allows the environment to be updated based on the role-specificaction. Thus, the resultingCoEnvabstraction is:obs, reward, done, private = env.step(role, action) 3.2 COORDINATION Co-Gym removes turn-taking restrictions by coordinating via the collaboration acts and a notifica- tion protocol that are shared across task environments. This binary metric indicates whether collaborative agents can success- fully deliver a task outcome within a predefined step limit. To audit how the initiative is shared in human-agent teams, we introduceInitiative Entropy(H init), which quantifies the balance of initiative among team members. Building on Chu-Carroll & Brown (1997), we define an utterance in collaborative dialogues asex- hibiting initiativeif it directs task execution or establishes mutual belief, and employ an LM to annotate utterances (see Figure 12 for the judging prompt and examples). Using entropy as a measure assigns higher values to more uniform distributions and lower values to more skewed ones. Additional task environments (e.g., computer-use environments (Xie et al., 2024b)) have been contributed since our open-source release. 4.2 SUPPORTEDTASKS Travel PlanningTravel planning is a widely sought yet complex task, as optimal solutions depend on users’ latent preferences and constraints that may not be explicit in the initial query. The Related Work environment supportsSearchPaperaction to retrieve papers based on the given query. First, the LM makes a 3-way decision based on all available information (i.e., task description, 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 3:Results in Co-Gym (Simulated).The human is simulated bygpt-4o. We incorporate a Scratchpad module as an in-session mem- ory for all agents (Sumers et al., 2023). 5.1.1 RESULTS INCO-GYM(SIMULATED) Under the same step limit, collaborative agents struggle more to complete the task.When we simulate human users using an LLM-based user simulator, human-agent collaboration exhibits a lower Delivery Rate compared to Fully Autonomous Agents in the simulated condition with a step limit of 30. For example, before starting to plan the trip based on the initial query, the agent might ask, “Are there any particular cities or attractions you want to visit?”; after drafting the first version of a related work section, the simulated human might suggest, “Could you please add headings?”. Therefore, users frequently need to provide step-by-step instructions to guide the collaboration, as reflected in the lowH init score, which indicates unbalanced initiative-taking. For example (Figure 15), when collaborating on a related work section about “Software Techniques for Emerging Hardware Platforms,” the LM agent asks the human to narrow the search range for em- bedding methods in NLP tasks, as it is tangential to the topic but previously mentioned. 39% 43% Environment Awareness (EA.1-EA.4) Failures in recognizing or accounting for operational constraints and resources within the task environment. We implemented the turn-taking ver- sion by removing the notification protocol and constraining interaction so that humans and agents must alternate actions. the agent didn’t wait for every instruction and started working like a real teammate; I could step in anytime to guide it”, “Output quality was good in both; non–turn-taking was effective. A remain- ing challenge is that the system should ask for help when it hits an error—ideally it can do both simultaneously.” 6 CONCLUSION We introduce Collaborative Gym (Co-Gym), the first framework designed to evaluate and facilitate human-agent collaboration with dual control over task environments and non-turn-taking interac- tion. Broader ImpactThe development of collaborative agents has the potential to transform human- computer interaction across industries. All ex- perimental details necessary to reproduce our results are specified in §5.1, includin