REAL METHOD of "Discovering Novel LLM Experts via Task-Capability Coevolution" (arXiv 2604.14969v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To extend capabilities, the current pre-training and post-training paradigm requires manually starting training runs with static datasets or reward functions every time. Overall, AC/DC brings us one step closer to a profoundly new paradigm of LLM development, where con- tinual improvements to the diversity of model capabilities can be accelerated by leveraging existing models as stepping stones to increasingly powerful models. Developers must continually adapt to incremental improvements in static datasets (Albalak et al., 2024; Kandpal et al., 2025), environ- ments (Intellect, 2025; Lambert et al., 2024; Novikov et al., 2025), learning algorithms (Shao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025b), and architectures (Yang et al., 2025; Muennighoff et al., 2024), to push the boundaries of frontier models. By discovering whole collectives of small and accessible LLMs with diverse capabilities, we can overcome the limitations and weaknesses of any single trained model or the need to train different models separately. For each weight matrixW, we compute its singular value decom- positionW=UΣV T and apply perturbations to the firstksingular values inΣbefore reconstruc- tion, loosely inspired by Sun et al. We then compute a skill vector (i.e., signature of quality and diversity) for each model and a pass rate for each task. Based on those, we first apply minimal criterion (MC) filters (gibberish LLM filter, impossible task filter) and then select the models and tasks to update the archives, respectively. This is especially interesting considering that our task forces require very little compute to merge and then serve them in consideration of the potential costs of GPT- 4o. This finding suggests that a collective of smaller, diverse, and capable models possesses the knowledge of a single frontier model, which can be leveraged given advances in BoN section methods. The algorithm implementation task (right) shows diversity in coding style and approach while main- taining algorithmic correctness. A complementary challenge to determining seed conditions for coevolution is determining the right minimal criteria to facilitate the discovery of ideal model behaviors that are non-trivial to obtain via loss or objective functions. With AC/DC, we demonstrate a first step towards this vision, bringing us closer to discovering collective AI that is as open-ended, complex, and creative as human civilization. Are quality diversity algorithms better at generating stepping stones than objective-based search? InProceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. For each model, we compute its novelty relative to models with higher fitness, encouraging retention of models that solve unique subsets of tasks. Algorithm 2Dominated Novelty Score Computation for One Solution 1:Input:Solutions, ArchiveA, Parametersk,α dom,w(difficulty weights) 2:F ← {s′ ∈ A:fitness(s′)>fitness(s)}▷Find fitter solutions 3:ifF=∅then 4:returnα dom ▷Maximum score if no fitter solutions exist 5:end if 6:scores←[] 7:foreachs ′ ∈ Fdo 8:v s ←skill vector ofs ▷Binary vector of task successes 9:v s′ ←skill vector ofs ′ 10:// Compute weighted unique skills: Since multiple-choice question (MCQ) benchmarks are prone to ”cheating” when evaluating Cover- age (randomly sampling each option once will lead to 100% accuracy), we design new, open-ended versions of these benchmarks, which we then refer to asMMLU judge,MMLU Pro judge,GPQA judge, andBBH judge. A.4.3 BEST-OF-N SINGLE-ANSWER-SELECTIONMETHODS In this section, we elaborate on our single-answer-selection methods used in Sec. We apply this process in a devide-and-conquer approach, first, grouping all candidate solutions into pairs, then selecting the ”winners”, and repeating this process until only one answers remains. Selection Method Optimization.The benchmark-specific selection strategies highlight the impor- tance of matching aggregation methods to task characteristics. We then select theNmodels that maximize the Coverage on our synthetic data archive, ”optimizing” for complementary skills. A.4.1, using the llm-as-a-judge vari- ants of the respective benchmarks), except for Minerva Math, due to compute constraints for this ablation. First, we assess embedding-based similarity, and then we evaluate semantic novelty using an LLM judge. 35 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 D.5 COMPARISON TOPRIORQD METHODS To compare AC/DC (with coevolution and QD) with prior quality-diversity approaches without coevolution (DNS (Bahlous-Boldi et al., 2025) and CycleQD (CQD) (Kuroki et al., 2025)), we conduct experiments using identical training conditions. For all methods discussed, we train on the same model family, Qwen 2. Both baseline methods are trained on the same four benchmarks used in our evaluation, with 50 fixed training samples drawn from each of GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), AgentBench OS, and AgentBench DB (Liu et al., 2023). D.5.1 FULLRESULTS FORALLMETHODS ONALLBENCHMARKS Table 13:Comparison of AC/DC (ours) to prior QD methods.Results showing average Coverage across all benchmarks. D.9 EFFECTS OFRESPONSELENGTHCRITERIA FOREVOLVEDMODELSELECTION We may want to discover models that follow desired criteria that are non-trivial to train for via loss functions. Setting additional minimal criteria for models during coevolution can be a simpler approach of discovering more suitable models for solving tasks in desired ways than defining custom loss functions or architecture adaptations. "Write a python function called ‘first_repeated_character‘ to find the first repeated character in a given string.", "test_cases": For the A * algorithm, address the properties of a consistent heuristic and how it ensures the optimality of the solution.’ @staticmethod def score(t: from sandbox_eval_helper import eval_with_llm_judge instructions = TaskFamily.get_instructions(t) criteria = [ "The proof should be logically sound and well-structured.", "The proof should correctly prove the correctness of the given algorithm.", "The proof should cover both the base case and the inductive step if applicable. Provide your answer in the simplest form, without any additional explanation or steps." @staticmethod def score(t: # For math or code related tasks, implements the step-by- step code to compute the correct answer given the task instructions. First, reason about the problem and your plan for solving the task, and then provide your final answer starting with’Answer