REAL METHOD of "WorldEdit: Towards Open-World Image Editing with a Knowledge-Informed Benchmark" (arXiv 2602.07095v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this gap, we introduceWorldEdit, a dataset specifically designed to en- able world-driven image editing. WorldEdit consists of high-quality editing sam- ples, guided by paraphrased instructions that align with real-world causal logic. With WorldEdit, we use a two-stage training framework for fine-tuning models like Bagel, integrating with a causal verification reward. Our results show that the proposed dataset and methods significantly nar- row the gap with GPT-4o and Nano-Banana, demonstrating competitive perfor- mance not only in instruction following but also in knowledge plausibility, where many open-source systems typically struggle. Yet, as shown in Figure 5, we observe that even when using paraphrasing to convey editing intent to pre-trained generative models, the editing results of most models are still quite poor. On the other hand, even giving paraphrased instructions, many visual expressions remain challeng- ing for pre-trained generative models to follow and render, like the single-sided structure of a M¨obius strip or scattering pattern of collapsed building blocks in Figure 5. GPT-4oOurs NanoBanana Bagel Remove {people, leopard, train, trees}from the picture. KRIS-Bench (Wu et al., 2025) and RISEBench (Zhao et al., 2025) have proposed corresponding benchmark sets, but these cannot provide supervision for training and are limited in scale. Using images from publicly available real-world segmentation datasets as original inputs, we employ instruction decom- position and multi-step editing via GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) to generate edited images that con- form to world knowledge logic. Finally, to validate the effectiveness of WorldEdit, we conducted a two-stage training procedure based on Bagel (Deng et al., 2025). In the first stage, we perform supervised fine-tuning with para- phrased instructions, enabling the model to better interpret implicit editing commands and align them with corresponding visual transformations. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • We introduceWorldEdit, along with a challenging benchmarkWorldEdit-Test, specifically de- signed to capturecause-driven visual transformationswith world knowledge. • Our approach achievesstate-of-the-artperformance among open-source models on the WorldEdit-Test, demonstrating superior instruction generation and following capability. Since most diffusion-based methods rely on relatively small text encoders, they struggle to handle complex and fine-grained editing instructions that require reasoning. This limitation arises because, although unified models possess strong comprehension and generation abilities, it re- mains an open question whether these abilities can be mutually reinforced, and how their pretrained knowledge and reasoning skills can be effectively leveraged to advance image editing. RISEBench (Zhao et al., 2025) and KRIS-Bench (Wu et al., 2025) support to evaluates knowledge reasoning in image editing, but they do not provide training data. ReasonPix2Pix (Jin et al., 2024b) and EditWorld (Yang et al., 2024) only provided limited unverified knowledge editing data, and were constrained by early image editing techniques, resulting in poor image quality and insufficient knowledge. Therefore, the lack of large-scale, high-quality training data continues to be a critical bottleneck. In this paper, we introduceWorldEdit, a benchmark that addresses these gaps by providing both large-scale training and evaluation datasets. WorldEdit offers high-quality re- sources for supervised training of editing models, while enabling a more comprehensive assessment of their ability to integrate world knowledge, reasoning, and visual editing. To address this gap, we introduce WorldEdit, a benchmark comprising both training and test data. Our benchmark emphasizes how changes unfold under specific real-world constraints, with the goal of providing a more focused and comprehensive evaluation of models’ ability to reason about and simulate cause-driven visual transformations. First, we employ a detection model to extract object names from real-world images. This step aims to obtain the objects names and basic descriptions within the images, likea rusted bollardand a white rope securing a ship to the bollard. For each object, we generate questions regarding its changes under different conditions. We then utilize a pre-trained Large Language Model (LLM) to answer the valid questions obtained from the previous step. For more complex editing instructions (failed more than 3 times), we decom- pose them and performs multi-step editing to enhance the quality of the edited images. 3.2 TRAINING WITHWORLDEDIT To assess the capability of WorldEdit in eliciting cross-modal reasoning and transferring knowledge from pre-trained multimodal models to visual generation tasks, we implemented a two-stage fine- tuning strategy using Bagel (Deng et al., 2025) as our baseline model. This phase aims to enhance the model’s capacity to interpret editing commands, leverage its inherent world knowledge, and establish a robust mapping from language instructions to visual modifications using a causal language modeling objective where loss is applied both to the text and image tokens. Then, we employ reinforcement learning via the Flow-GRPO (Liu et al., 2025a) algorithm to fur- ther refine the model’s generative behavior. For each category, the Top-1, Top-2, and Top-3 scores are highlighted respectively. The causal verification rewardaddresses the core objective of fostering genuine causal under- standing. The overall reward is computed asR=R reason +Rfidelity +Rcausal. This multi-objective reward struc- ture ensures the model is guided toward reasoning-aware, high-fidelity, and causally grounded image editing, effectively leveraging the rich cause-and-effect relationships embedded in the WorldEdit benchmark to support open-world visual transformation tasks. 4 EXPERIMENTS 4.1 EXPERIMENTALSETUP Baselines.We evaluate our method against a broad set of representative baselines, including tra- ditional diffusion-based editing models and recent open-source unified multimodal models. Our method generates outputs that are both visually plausible and causally coherent, whereas baselines often produce irrelevant or stylistic edits, failing to reflect the causal logic of the instruction. Our method has made significant progress in knowledge consistency and instruction following, achieving state-of-the-art performance among all open-source mod