REAL METHOD of "To View Transform or Not to View Transform: NeRF-based Pre-training Perspective" (arXiv 2603.28090v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

NERF-BASEDPRE-TRAININGPERSPECTIVE Hyeonjun Jeong, Juyeb Shin, Dongsuk Kum KAIST, Daejeon, Korea {hyeonjun.jeong, juyebshin, dskum}@kaist.ac.kr ABSTRACT Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have emerged as a prominent pre-training paradigm for vision-centric autonomous driving, which enhances 3D geometry and appear- ance understanding in a fully self-supervised manner. Existing approaches (Yang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024) extract point features for radiance fields by interpolating discretized and fixed voxel features from a view transformation backbone, and then pre-train the backbone through photometric and depth errors rendered from those point features. Moreover, the pre-trained NeRF is discarded during downstream tasks, preventing effective transfer of NeRF knowledge and limiting the exploitation of enhanced 3D representations from pre-training. Experiments on the nuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020) benchmark demonstrate that 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Multi-view Images NeRP3D Pts for NeRF Pts Query Rendering Head Perception Head Rendering Head Perception Head NeRF Discarded after Pre - training pre-training fine-tuning NeRF-based Pre-training with View Transform NeRF-Resembled Point-based 3D Detector Discretized Voxel Feat. Comparison of the previous NeRF-based pre-training methods and our NeRP3D pipeline. our approach significantly improves not only the rendering quality but also the downstream perception tasks for autonomous driving compared to previous approaches that simply incorporate NeRF-based pre-training into view transformation frameworks. These findings highlight the importance of aligning the 3D backbone with the pre-training model as well as continuous 3D representation learning in advancing NeRF-based pre-training for enhanced 3D scene understanding. NeRFs are typically trained in a self-supervised manner, minimizing photometric reconstruction loss across multiple views. GaussianPretrain (Xu et al., 2024) has demonstrated the feasibility of 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023) for pre-training 3D scene 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 ⋯ 2D Backbone RGB SDF Det Map Occ ⋯ ⋯ Ray-wise Sampling Spatial Sampling Multi-view Images Deformable Cross Attention 3D Positional Encoder ⋯ ⋯ Pretrain Finetune Figure 3: Through NeRF-resembled design, our method maintains a coherent 3D understanding from scattered points across diverse tasks while accommodating task-specific point sampling strategies, enabling the model to effectively leverage underlying geometric and appearance information while allowing for task-dependent feature specialization. However, existing methods (Yang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024), which rely on view transformation, have inherent con- straints that diminish NeRF’s capacity for continuous and fine-grained 3D representation. Moreover, pre-trained NeRF is discarded during downstream tasks, resulting in suboptimal 3D representations enhancement from pre-training. 3 METHOD NeRP3D is a simple and effective NeRF-resembled architecture that unifies scene reconstruction and perception tasks from single-timestep multi-view images. 3, our framework operates in two distinct stages within a unified architecture, without discarding or adding modules depending on stage or task requirements. Specifically, for each pixel in the multi-view images, we define a camera ray ri based on its origin oi and direction di, which are derived from camera intrinsics and extrinsics. Then, to enhance 3D point representations with image-aligned context, we adopt a deformable cross- attention (Zhu et al., 2020) with 2D image features F. We first encode each 3D query point x by γ(·) and learn a set of Ns sampling offsets {∆πs |s= 1, ..., Ns} relative to its projected 2D location π(x), focusing interaction with relevant image regions. Then, the unbiased and occlusion-aware weights (Wang et al., 2021) wj =T jαj is computed from αj, where Tj = Qj−1 k=1(1−α k) is the accumulated transmittance. The overall loss for pre-training consists of RGB reconstruction loss, depth supervision loss, and reprojection loss: Lpretrain =λ rgbLrgb +λ depthLdepth +λ reproj Lreproj (6) where λrgb, λdepth, and λreproj are the loss scale factors for each pre-training loss. Lrgb is RGB reconstruction loss and Ldepth is depth estimation loss directly supervised by LiDAR measurements. This straightforward adaptation maintains the enhanced geometric and appearance information learned during pre-training while enabling seamless integration with established perception architectures. 4 EXPERIMENTS We demonstrate NeRP3D on the nuScenese (Caesar et al., 2020) dataset against thestate-of-the-art NeRF-based pre-training approaches as well as comparable methods. 4.2 EVALUATIONMETRICS We evaluate performance across two pretext scene reconstruction tasks and three downstream 3D perception tasks by following standard evaluation protocols for each task to ensure comparability with existing methods. 4.3 IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS To ensure fair comparison with prior works (Yang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024), we adopt identical pre-training architectures and detection heads. Class-balanced sampling (CBGS) or specialized data augmentations are not applied for finetuning, and all downstream tasks are trained and evaluated using single-timestep images only, without temporal information or frame stacking. To compare with previous NeRF-based pre-training methods on detection, we follow the fine-tuning framework of UniPAD (Yang et al., 2024) and also reproduce the results of both UVTR-C (UniPAD) (Li et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024) and TPVFormer (SelfOcc) (Huang et al., 2023; 2024) by replacing the NeRF network for pre-training with UVTR’s object detection head. Compared to the state-of-the-artNeRF-based self-supervision methods, our method outperforms 1.8 mAP and 2.1 NDS on 800×450 1.2 mAP and 1.8 NDS on 1600×900 over UniPAD, as shown in Tab. 1 (b), we evaluate the performance of our method on Occ3D- nuScenes for 3D occupancy prediction. Our approach inherits NeRF’s strength in modeling fine-grained representations, leading to improved mIoU and consistent 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 3:Zero-shot scene reconstruction performance (Argoverse 2→nuScenes) Method Abs Rel↓Sq Rel↓RMSE↓RMSE log↓ PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ UniPAD 0.985 11.767 14.963 4.390 18.668 0.432 0.577 NeRP3D 0.626 6.251 10.728 0.921 28.238 0.905 0.111 gains over UniPAD and SelfOcc. 1 