REAL METHOD of "Towards Improved Sentence Representations using Token Graphs" (arXiv 2603.03389v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, standard pooling methods like mean or max aggregation treat tokens as an in- dependent set, discarding the rich relational structure captured by the model’s self-attention layers and making them susceptible to signal dilution. To address this, we introduce GLOT, a lightweight, structure-aware pooling module that re- frames pooling as relational learning followed by aggregation. Operating on the outputs of a frozen LLM, GLOTfirst constructs a latent token-similarity graph, then refines token representations with a graph neural network, and finally aggregates them using a readout layer. Furthermore, it is competitive with state-of-the-art techniques on benchmarks like GLUE and MTEB with20x fewer trainable parametersand speeds up the training time by over100xcompared with parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. To this end, we propose GLOT, a lightweight, structure- aware module that operates on the token hidden states produced by LLMs to obtain a sentence-level representation. The LLM backbone remains entirely frozen; only the GNN module and a task-specific head are trained. • We present GLOT, a compact and parameter-efficient module that enhances the performance of both encoder- and decoder-only frozen backbones with 20x fewer trainable parameters and over 100x faster training time than LLM fine-tuning-based methods. Crucially, we introduce a novel diagnostic stress test that confirms GLOT’s superior robustness to signal dilution, a key failure mode for other methods. • We provide a detailed analysis of our method’s components, demonstrating how the graph construction impacts performance and quantifying its substantial computational efficiency over fine-tuning methods. Recent works propose the usage of attention and diffusion dynamics (Liu et al., 2021) and interleaving GNN and Transformer layers for improved text classification performance. Given token hidden states from a frozen language model, our trainable module performs three stages : (1) it constructs a latent token-similarity graph, (2) a TOKEN-GNN performs relational learning to refine token representations, and (3) a readout layer aggregates the refined vectors into a final sentence representation,z 3 METHOD In this section we formalize and discuss the properties of our method. 3.2 GLOT We introduce GLOT, a trainable framework that transforms the token-level hidden states into a final, sentence-level vector, z=GLOT(X) . A scalar importance score mi is computed for each refined token vectoru i, normalized using softmax to create weightsπ, and used to compute a weighted sum: If we disable the TOKEN- GNN by setting its number of layers to zero (i.e., K= 0), then the refined vectors are simply the original hidden states (that is, ui =x i), and the framework reduces to a direct weighted pooling mechanism. From here, we can model both standard pooling methods (like mean or CLS pooling) by using fixed weights and adaptive scoring methods, like AdaPool from Brothers (2025), by keeping the weights learnable. Since many tasks are zero-shot, all learnable heads are first trained on the MS MARCO dataset (Bajaj et al., 2016) with a contrastive loss while keeping the LLM backbones frozen. The results in Table 3 show that GLOTis a robust performer across all tasks for both encoder- and decoder-only architectures. This demonstrates that our method provides a practical and accessible way to generate high-quality embeddings from large, frozen LLMs on consumer- grade hardware. 9 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 5:A comparison of training methods by resource consumption and performanceon the CoLA task, using the Mistral-7B backbone. Method # Trainable Params GPU Memory (GB)↓Batch Runtime (ms)↓MCC↑ Full FT+EOS 7.11B 32.591318.8±1.149.63 LoRA (r= 64)+EOS 167.8M 33.501454.6±1.148.23 GLOT(ours)8.92M 0.4213.4±3.053.29 5 CONCLUSION As LLMs continue to scale, the computational cost of full fine-tuning becomes prohibitive, establish- ing the need for improved pooling methods that operate on frozen backbones as a crucial research problem. GLOTfirst constructs a latent token-similarity graph, refines token representations using a GNN, and then aggregates them with an attention mechanism. We acknowledge that the pre-trained language models used as backbones in our study may reflect societal biases present in their training corpora. Our methodology is described in Section 3, with detailed pseudo-code available in Algorithm 1. These methods achieve state-of-the-art performance but require modifying the LLM backbone, often through full- model training that is computationally prohibitive. Our approach is therefore lightweight, accessible, and applicable to both encoder-only and decoder-only models without expensive training. While post-processing methods like whitening can mitigate this (Su et al., 2021), they do not address the underlying information loss from pooling. The graph-based components of our method are implemented using PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). Training Details.Unless otherwise noted, all trainable pooling heads were trained for 2 epochs using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of2×10 −4 and no weight decay. To accelerate training, we implemented a feature to precompute and cache the frozen backbone’s hidden states before training the pooling heads. Refinement with TOKEN-GNN 14:U k−1 ← Ulayers [k−1] 15:U k ←GNN-LAYER k(Uk−1,edge index) 16:U layers .APPEND(U k) 17:end for 18:U f used←JUMPINGKNOWLEDGECONCAT(U layers )▷Step 3: Readout Layer 20:π←SOFTMAXBYGRAPH(m,batch idx)▷Normalize scores per sentence graph 21:Z pooled ←π⊙U f used ▷Apply attention weights 22:Z←SCATTERADD(Z pooled,batch idx)▷Aggregate via weighted sum per graph 23:returnZ 24:end function Table 6: Hyperparameter Search Space Optimization Learning Rate{1e-3, 2e-4, 2e-5} Weight Decay{0.0, 1e-5, 5e-5} Token-GNN Architecture GNN Layers (K){2, 4} GNN Hidden Dimension{64, 128, 256} Jumping Knowledge{cat, max, mean, none} Input Projection Dimension{128, 256, 512} Graph Construction Similarity Threshold (τ){0.1, 0.3, 0.6} B.2 MODELCONFIGURATIONS Backbone Models.All backbone models were loaded from the Hugging Face Hub. [CLS]/[EOS] pooling for encoder models takes the hidden state of the first token. • AdaPool:Our implementation follows the original paper (Brothers, 2025), consisting of a two-layer MLP with a Tanh activation that computes a scalar score for each token, followed by a softmax and weighted average. Followi