REAL METHOD of "Locally Subspace-Informed Neural Operators for Efficient Multiscale PDE Solving" (arXiv 2505.16030v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our approach trains a NO to instantly predict the GMsFEM basis by using a novel subspace- informed loss that learns the entire relevant subspace, not just individual functions. On standard multiscale benchmarks—including a linear elliptic diffusion problem and the nonlinear, steady-state Richards equation—our GMsFEM-NO method achieves a reduction in solution error compared to stan- dalone NOs and other hybrid methods. the NO can be trained on a small computational grid and evaluated on a larger one with minimal loss of accuracy, ensuring easy scalability. Instead of learning individual basis functions—which can be sensitive to small perturbations—we design a novel subspace-aware loss function that enforces physical consistency at the subspace level. Our approach is distinct from existing hybrid methods Bhattacharya et al. DeepPOD and PCANet also leverage neural networks to learn compact solution representations, providing a relevant baseline for comparing the efficiency of our method. Results showed that our approach is better than NO in terms of solution accuracy and requires less training data to achieve similar accuracy. Illustration of training(a)and inference(b)stages of the proposed GMsFEM-NO method. During training the subspace- informed loss L is applied to align predicted subspace { eψωi j }Nbf j=1 with {ψωi j }Nbf j=1. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2.3 GENERALIZEDMULTISCALEFINITEELEMENTMETHOD 2.3.1 MULTISCALE SPACE APPROXIMATION Multiscale methods Efendiev & Hou (2009) form a broad class of numerical techniques. For each local domainω i, we define theNeumannmatrixA ωi h by v⊤ h Aωi h wh = Z ωi κ(x)∇vh · ∇wh dx,∀v h, wh ∈V h(ωi) and theMassmatrixS ωi h by v⊤ h Sωi h wh = Z ωi κ(x)vhwh dx,∀v h, wh ∈V h(ωi). 2.5 PROPOSED METHOD 2.5.1 GMSFEM-NOALGORITHM We propose an efficient hybrid method for generating basis functions in the GMsFEM using NOs, significantly accelerating the offline stage. 2.5.2 SUBSPACE-INFORMED LOSS FUNCTIONS The selection of an appropriate loss function is critical when training NOs. We propose aSubspace Alignment Loss (SAL)that directly optimizes the geometric consistency of the learned subspaces. We compare proposed loss functions (5), (6) with conventional one which is L2 loss. Since basis functions are defined only up to their sign (see Appendix E), the conventional L2 loss is adapted to account for this invariance, resulting in the Relative Basis FunctionL 2 Loss (RBFL2): For the 100×100×100 grid, we used 150 train and 50 test samples due to computational constraints. For training NOs, we utilize the first8basis functions (N bf) per subdomain as training targets. The comparison of our approach with baseline methods is presented in Appendix G. 3.1L RBFL 2 VS.L SAL ,L SAL-PR To determine the optimal training configuration for the NOs predicting basis function subspaces, we performed a grid search over architectural parameters and training hyperparameters. Performance comparison of loss functions for NO training (100×100grid,N v = 36). For large-scale 3D simulations (100×100×100 grid), we employed the GMsFEM-NO method with the SAL loss. Although the SAL-PR loss offers benefits for smaller problems (see Appendix D), its computational cost becomes prohibitive at this scale, making the standard SAL loss the practical choice. While GMsFEM-NO reduces the cost of the traditional GMsFEM offline stage over many subsequent simulations, it does not eliminate cost of train data generation and training. Diffusion,8Diffusion,9Richards,8Richards,9 Train grid Test grid GMsFEM-NO 100 5002.42% 2.97% 4.70% 3.49% 250 5001.45% 1.79% 2.25% 1.97% GMsFEM 5001.17% 1.46% 1.93% 1.66% 4 CONCLUSION In this work, we propose GMsFEM-NO, a novel method for solving multiscale PDEs that employs NOs to predict the multiscale basis function subspaces in the GMsFEM offline stage, replacing the conventional solution of local eigenvalue problems. A key contribution is a novel subspace alignment loss function, which enables direct learning of the basis function subspace and improves the L2 accuracy over conventional LRBFL2 loss. The primary limitation of our method is its current restriction to structured grids due to the chosen NO architecture. The design and analysis of the generalized finite element method.Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering, 181(1-3):43–69, 2000. Preconditioning markov chain monte carlo method for geomechanical subsidence using multiscale method and machine learning technique.Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 392:113420, 2021. B TRAININGGMSFEM-NO We train separate specialized NOs for each geometric domain type: Each NO predicts theN bf basis functions for all local domains of its assigned type. In considering the theoretical soundness of our approach, we note that a formal upper bound linking principal angles to the final error would further strengthen the framework. To address this sign ambiguity, we define the RBFL2 loss as: First selected neural network is trained on standard regression problem. Intrusive POD with FFNO basis.Architecture is defined by the number of features in the hidden layer, number of modes used by spectral convolution, and number of layers. Number of features in the hidden layer was fixed to 64, number of modes was selected from the set [10,14,16] , number of layers – from the set [3,4,5] . As trunk net we used convolution architecture with spatial downsampling by a factor of 2 along each dimension after each layer, simultaneously, the number of channels was multiplied by 2 after each layer, as branch net we used standard MLP. Number of trunk network layers was fixed to 4, trunk encoder transformed 2 input features to either 4 or 5 features, kernel size of convolution in trunk was selected among [3,7] . In the branch net we vary number of layers[3,4]and the number of basis vectors[100,200]in the last layer. method train error test error GMsFEM-NO2.6% 2.8% PCANet6% 24% kernel7% 100% Comparison of regression-based approaches with GMsFEM-NO appears in Table 10. H GMSFEM-NO TRAININGDETAILS For F-FNO training to predict basis functions subspace, we used AdamW optimizer Loshchilov & Hutter (2017) with cosine decay learning rate scheduler. I F-FNO, GNOT, TRANSOLVER++ TRAININGDETAILS I.1 F-FNO TRAININGDETAILS For F-FNO Tran et al. batch size 4, 4 attention layers, hidden size of 128 for attention, MLP, and input embeddings, 8 heads, 4 experts, and 4 MLP layers. batch size 4, 8 layers, hidden size 256, 