REAL METHOD of "ATLAS: Adaptive Transfer Scaling Laws for Multilingual Pretraining, Finetuning, and Decoding the Curse of Multilinguality" (arXiv 2510.22037v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we undertake the largest multilingual scaling laws study to date, totaling 774 mul- tilingual training experiments, spanning 10M-8B model parameters, 400+ training languages and 48 evaluation languages. We introduce the ADAPTIVETRANS- FERSCALINGLAW(ATLAS) for both monolingual and multilingual pretraining, which outperforms existing scaling laws’ out-of-sample generalization often by more than0.3R 2. Third, we succeed in modeling thecurse of multilinguality—the phenomena where adding languages to the training mixture can degrade loss for each language, due to limited model capacity. The law for [monolingual vocabulary, monolingual training]=(—), the law for [multilingual vocab- ulary, monolingual training]=(- - -), and the law for [multilingual vocabulary, unimax training]=(···). We find (1) per-language optimal scaling trajectories are similar, (2) there is a compute effi- ciency tax for training withmultilingualvocabularies or training sets (especially for English), and (3) as Hindi and Swahili observe data repetition their curves slope upward from dimin- ishing returns. In Figure 1 we also estimate a compute efficiency tax between multilingual and monolingual training. 4.A general pretrain vs finetune formula, that informs practitioners whether it is more ef- ficient to pretrain from scratch or begin from a multilingual Unimax checkpoint (Figure 7). R2(N)for the largest model sizes,R 2(D)for the largest token ranges,R 2(C)for the largest com- pute runs, andR 2(M)for unique training language mixtures not seen at training (more details in Subsection B.3). Model TrainingWe pretrain models from 10M to 8B parameters, using hyperparameter choices similar to those trained in Kudugunta et al. In this work, we train both monolingual and multilingual models, varying the model sizeN, training tokensD, multilingual data proportions, and the total training computeC. Across experiments we pretrain 280 monolingual models, 240 bilingual models, 120 multilingual mixtures, and we finetune 130 monolingual models from Unimax checkpoints, total- ing over 750 independent training runs. the largest model sizesN, most training tokensD, most computeC, and unique multilingual training mixturesM. (2022)’s two power-law terms (Equa- tion (1)), allows us to separate how loss scales model sizeNand data sizeD.Eis the irreducible loss (representing the entropy of natural text), (A,B) are learned coefficients and and (α,β) are scaling exponents for for model size and data size respectively. For each term, we apply a saturation function (Equation (3)), ensuring a smooth decay on the effective data for each subse- quent epoch where the training tokens have surpassed that languages’ unique tokensU. Research Question:How do scaling laws differ by language, and by monolingual vs multilingual training mixtures? Monolingual scaling behavior is consistent in form, and multilingual variants exhibit a variable-sized compute-efficiency tax.Figure 1 compares optimal scaling trajectories across six- variable resourced languages, under three regimes:monolingual vocabulary + monolingual train- ing,multilingual vocabulary + monolingual training, andmultilingual vocabulary + unimax train- ing. Both multilingual vocabulary and Unimax training shift the frontier upwards, evidencing acompute- efficiency taxrelative to the monolingual-vocabulary/monolingual-training setting. We define a Bilingual Transfer Score (BTS) as the relative training efficiency of a bilingual model(s, t) = (50%,50%)compared to the monolingual modeltat reaching the same loss level.2 dmono denotes a pre-defined target step (42B tokens),L t(d)computes the monolingual models’ loss at stepd, andσ bi finds the number of tokens for the bilingual model to reach that loss. The mesh-grid is a surface estimate, using a cubic spline.Target language loss is most affected by the number of training languages, but this loss penalty declines for larger models with more capacity. Modeling the Relationship betweenK,N, andD.In Figure 4 we examine the relative loss increase, over a monolingual baseline, from varying the number of training languagesK, and either the model sizeN(left plot) or total training tokensD tot (right plot). First, the number of training languagesKhas far more impact on the relative loss thanNorD. We de- rive the compute optimal scaling equations.The iso-lossesindicate that a practitioner should ex- pand their compute budget byC·r 0.97 to ex- pand their language coverage byr. Estimating the Iso-Loss Frontier, and Compute-Optimal scaling ofN, Dwhen adding languages:K→rK.Next, we examine the practical case where a practitioner wants to retrain a new model, increasing the number of languages it serves fromKtorK, without hindering the performance the original model achieved on the existing languages. We can compute this iso-loss by equating the loss terms:L(K, N, Dtot) = AKϕ N α + BK ψ Dβ = A(Kr) ϕ N ′α + B(Kr) ψ D′β . For eight languages, we plot the loss curves for 2B parameter models pretraining mono- lingually from scratch (···), finetuning monolingually from the Unimax base model (- - -), and the difference between these losses (—). We annotate the number of tokens at which the pretrained loss becomes better than the finetuning loss. When the loss difference reaches zero, pretraining from scratch has surpassed finetuning using equal compute.Depending on the token (or compute) budget, it is usually more effective to finetune a multilingual checkpoint if there are<144Btokens, and pretrain from scratch if the budget accommodates≥283Btokens. 6 PRETRAIN ORFINETUNE? Research Question:When training a model for target languaget, is it more effective to pretrain from scratch, or finetune a general-purpose massively multilingual checkpoint? Prior scaling law work focuses on compute efficiency with respect to pretraining from scratch. In Figure 6, we plot the interpolated loss curves for the model pretrained from scratch, the model finetuned from a checkpoint, and the difference between these losses, for several languages. Scaling laws and compute-optimal training beyond fixed training durations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18392, 2024. Training Steps 30k+ We vary the steps according to experiments, to always ensure we are well above likely chinchilla compute optimal ranges. We use the same hy- perparameters as discussed for pretraining, but reset the learning schedule, and train for at least another30k+steps. We then measure how many more training to