REAL METHOD of "Robotic Manipulation by Imitating Generated Videos Without Physical Demonstrations" (arXiv 2507.00990v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Given a language command and an initial scene im- age, a video diffusion model generates potential demonstra- tion videos, and a vision-language model (VLM) automati- cally filters out results that do not follow the command. A 6D pose tracker then extracts object trajectories from the video, and the trajectories are retargeted to the robot in an embodiment-agnostic fashion. Introduction Videos offer a rich and expressive source of training data for robotic manipulation, and numerous methods have suc- cessfully leveraged them for supervision. Prior work incor- porating video generation into robotics typically relies on additional supervision, such as task-specific training [30] or fine-tuning on offline robot trajectory datasets [14, 15]. By contrast, we ask whether a robot can perform real-world manipulation tasks solely by imitating generated videos— without any additional supervision or task-specific training. To this end, we introduce Robots Imitating Generated Videos (RIGVid), a framework that connects video genera- tion models to real-world robotic execution. Given an input RGB-D image of the scene and a free-form language command (e.g., “pour wa- ter on the plant”), we use a state-of-the-art video diffusion model to generate a candidate video of the task being per- formed. Given an initial scene image and depth, we generate a video conditioned on a language command. A VLM- based automatic filtering step (not shown) can be used to reject videos that fail to follow the prompt. A monocular depth estimator recovers depth for each frame of the generated video, and these depth maps are combined with the corresponding RGB frames to produce 6D Object Pose Trajectory. While this tracker relies on a pre- computed object mesh, preliminary experiments (App. C) indicate that our method is compatible with mesh-free ap- proaches, though their inference speed is currently infeasi- ble for real-time deployment. One example of this philosophy is the recent ReKep method [49], which uses a VLM to gen- erate relational keypoint constraints from a task description and then solves for a 6D trajectory given these constraints. We compare our approach to ReKep and demonstrate that video generation does, in fact, perform substantially bet- ter than the generation of a more sparse and high-level rep- resentation. Next, given a generated video, one may ask whether 6D object-level tracking is necessary, given its up- front requirement of an object mesh. (1) We propose a framework that enables robots to perform open-world ma- nipulation tasks without any real-world demonstrations — only generated videos. (3) We demonstrate that our combination of video generation and 6D trajectory extraction outperforms a wide variety of competing state- of-the-art methods based on VLMs, point tracking, optical flow, feature fields, and generated-goal supervision. Crucially, these methods rely on demonstrations collected under conditions closely match- ing the target task. In contrast, our method removes this re- quirement by generating task and scene-conditioned videos. This paradigm allevi- ates the need for paired demonstrations by leveraging of- fline video data, and has consequently attracted signifi- cant attention [12, 22, 32, 60, 77, 80, 90, 91, 96, 100– 102, 104, 107, 114, 131, 136]. [9] learn from large-scale human videos to output dense contact maps and trajectory waypoints, which downstream imitation, exploration, or reinforcement modules can trans- form into executable robot motions. However, these meth- ods suffer from domain gap between training videos and task-specific environments, and require additional mecha- nisms to obtain task-conditioned affordances. In contrast, our method does not explicitly predict affordances, but in- stead relies on generated, task- and scene-specific generated videos for imitation. A common limitation of these is their reliance on robot data, either to train the video generation model [72, 110], or to train policies [14], or both [3, 29, 30]. [4] uses gen- erated videos to compute rewards for RL training. While effective, their method relies on 1,822 human-collected robot demonstrations for four tasks, and is confined to tasks executable only by tools. In contrast, our approach requires no such data collection. Instead of tools, our method tracks objects, enabling a significantly broader range of manipulation tasks without using any robot data. Recent advances in vision foundation mod- els and large datasets have enabled zero-shot methods [6, 19, 63, 76, 87], which extend to unseen objects and cat- egories but still lag behind instance-level methods in per- formance. Robots Imitating Generated Videos An overview of our method is shown in Fig. Consis- tent with prior works adopting depth estimators in vision- based robotics [23, 37], we compute an affine scale-and- shift transformation, aligning the predicted depth in the first frame with the initial real depth map around the active ob- ject (discussed in Sec. While straightforward, this pro- cess constrains our method to settings where a mesh can be precomputed. C, our method is also compatible with mesh-free approaches—BundleSDF can jointly reconstruct and track the object—but current in- ference speeds make these alternatives infeasible for real- time use. We evaluate our method on four everyday manipulation tasks, which are il- lustrated in Fig. For each method, we describe its inputs and outputs, core approach, our modifications, and the motivation for its inclusion (additional details can be found in App. These tracks are then lifted to 3D using the depth map from the initial frame and converted into a sequence of 3D object poses via the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm. Given an initial RGBD image, task description, and active object mask, A VDC predicts ob- ject motion by first generating a task-conditioned video and then computing optical flow between frames. Conclusions We introduced Robots Imitating Generated Videos (RIGVid), the first method for robotic manipulation that 1The slight performance drop stems primarily from camera calibration challenges, as ALOHA’s arms yield less accurate pose estimates. A first-reconstruct-then-regress approach for weakly- supervised 6d object pose estimation. C Results and discussion on our method’s mesh-free ob- ject tracking version. Mesh-Free Object Tracking We experiment with a mesh-free object tracking version of our method. For the pouring task, we evalu- ate our method u