REAL METHOD of "Dual Randomized Smoothing: Beyond Global Noise Variance" (arXiv 2512.01782v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

(i) a variance estimator first predicts an optimal noise variance for each input, (ii) this estimated variance is then used by a standard RS classifier. (1) training-based RS, which improves robustness by explicitly training the base classifier on noisy inputs (Cohen et al., 2019; Salman et al., 2019; Jeong & Shin, 2020; Zhai et al., 2020; Jeong et al., 2021; 2023), and (2) de- noised smoothing, where noisy inputs are first denoised before classification (Salman et al., 2020; Carlini et al., 2023). The variance estimator predicts the optimalσfor each input, which is then used by the classifier for RS inference. We develop an iterative training procedure that sequentially optimizes both components. Then, we describe the training methods to optimize the performance. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 5.2 TRAINING METHODS 5.2.1 TRAINING THEVARIANCEESTIMATOR Building the Training Dataset.Trainingh e requires ground-truth labels for the optimal noise σc(x)of each input. Given a candidate setΣand a fixedh c, we evaluate for each input the certified radius under eachσ i ∈Σ. This step is usually the most computationally expensive part of the training, as it requires multiple certifications for each input. Specifically, a much smallerNcan be used to estimate ˆpA, then this weaker estimation can be plugged into the radius formula to compute an approximation of the certified radius. Another strategy to reduce the training cost is to train only on a subset of the train data, which we also study in §E.4. Motivated by this, we propose to use soft labels introduced below to train the variance estimator. A standard cross-entropy loss is then applied between the soft labels and the predicted class proba- bilities to evaluate the estimation performance. Overall Objective.The overall loss function to train the variance estimator is a weighted average between the soft-label cross-entropy loss and the consistency loss: Formally, assume the fraction of training samples with optimal noiseσ i isq i, thenw e(x) = 1/q i if the optimal noise forxisσ i. Formally, given an inputx, we first query the noise varianceσ c(x)fromg e. Then, we sample noise δc ∼ N(0, σc(x)2I), and apply the denoising step to obtain ˜x=denoise(x+δ c). The described training process naturally leads to an alternating training scheme, where we itera- tively train the variance estimator and finetune the classifier. In this section, we present a novel perspective of the proposed dual RS framework as a router among a pool of pretrained expert RS models. Then we defineg c(x, σ(x)) :=Hσi (x, σi)for all x∈ Xσi. In other words, the variance estimatorg e serves not only as a predictor for the optimal noise variance, but also as a router to select the best expert RS model for each input. First, it allows leveraging existing expert models without the need for training a new base classifier that performs well under all noise levels. Given a pool of expert models (potentially trained with different algorithms and hyperparameters), offering different trade-offs between accu- racy and robustness, one can train a standard RS model to route each input to the best expert model, then certify the routing choice by RS. 6.1 KEYRESULTS Dual RS with Single Pretrained Classifier.We first evaluate the performance of dual RS with a pretrained global classifier, as described in §5.2.1. Dual RS with Multiple Pretrained Experts (Routing).We further evaluate the efficacy of dual RS as a routing mechanism with multiple pretrained expert classifiers, as discussed in §5.3. Forσ= 1.0, we define theWeak Expert for Largeto be the same off-the-shelf model, and theStrong Expert for Largeto be another off-the-shelf model, pretrained by Sun et al. 5a shows the empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF) of this metric for variance estimators trained with different loss functions and hyperparameters on CIFAR-10. We observe that using soft cross-entropy (CE) loss instead of standard CE loss reduces the variance estimation accuracy, as it encourages the model to predict a suboptimal noise variance that yields a similar certified radius rather than the optimal one. However, fewer inputs are constrained significantly when using soft CE loss, as the curve is closer to the perfect estimation line when∆R c is large. A negative∆R σ means that the final radius is constrained by theR σ, while a positive∆R σ means it is constrained byR c. We observe that using soft CE loss decreases this ratio, and adding consistency loss further decreases it significantly. Using soft CE loss almost improves over the standard CE loss uniformly, while adding consistency loss slightly degrades the performance at small radii but improves it at large radii. Overall, the model trained with soft CE loss and consistency loss achieves the best accuracy-robustness trade-off. Our method consistently outperforms prior input-dependent noise approaches across most radii. For the proposed framework, detailed descriptions of the inference, certification, and training procedures are presented in §5. Experimental settings, including architectures, hyperparameters, and training details, are reported in §6 and §C. Gaussian loss smoothing enables certified training with tight convex relaxations.Trans. Then we haveP(F)≤P(F 1) +P(F 2)≤α+β, where the first inequality follows from the union bound. To compute the consistency loss, we always use two noise samples (m= 2) following Jeong & Shin (2020). C.2 TRAININGCOST We report the computational cost of training our dual RS framework. All experiments are conducted on NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs.Table 4 summarizes the GPU hours required for each major compo- nent of the training pipeline. 17 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 Radius 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Accuracy 1 Estimator Training 1 Estimator Training + 1 Classiﬁer Fine-tuning 2 Estimator Training + 1 Classiﬁer Fine-tuning Figure 7: Effect of training rounds for the variance estimator and the classifier.1 Estimator Trainingtrains the variance estimator using the off-the-shelf classifier.1 Estimator Training + 1 Classifier Finetuningfinetunes the classifier using the estimated variances by the trained variance estimator.2 Estimator Training + 1 Classifier Finetuningfurther re-train the variance estimator based on the finetuned classifier. E.4 REDUCINGTRAININGCOST To avoid the high cost of building training dataset, we adoptN= 100budget to estimate the certified radius for e