REAL METHOD of "HumanPCR: Probing MLLM Capabilities in Diverse Human-Centric Scenes" (arXiv 2508.13692v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose HumanPCR, an evaluation suite for probing MLLMs’ capacity about human-related visual contexts across three hierarchical levels: Moreover, analysis of Human-R reveals the struggle of models in extracting essential proactive visual evidence from diverse human scenes and their faulty reliance on query-guided retrieval. What object does the camera wearer gesture towards and does this action precedes or follow another person's utilization of the vacuum?CorrectOption:A.The camera wearer gestures towards the vacuum and then the floor; both gestures come before and after another person's picking up the vacuum respectively. Afterfeeding the dogs, the womancleans the sledbut thenrides out on a snowmobileherself, indicating that the sled was not prepared for her own use. Focus:Ego-centric Action UnderstandingFocus:General Video Questions Focus:Face and Human UnderstandingFocus:Sport-specialized Action Recognition SingleImage MultipleImages Third-person Video Egocentric Video Single Domain of Expertise MultipleDomains of Expertise GeneralDomain Feature Focus:Fine-grained Human PerceptionTask:HumanSelf-ContactDimension:Contact )VNBO$Focus:Complex Scene ComprehensionTask:Multiple-HumanSequencialActionDimension:Procedure )VNBO3Focus:Video Reasoning with Proactive Visual Evidence Domain:Outdoor AdventureType:Cause Reasoning Figure 1: After ①feeding the dogs, the woman ②cleans the sledbut then ③rides out on a snowmobile herself, indicating that the sled was not prepared for her own use. The distribution of proactive and referred visual evidence is highlighted, while the score of recent video context extraction methods based on (1) Clip Score, (2) Object Detection Score, (3) MLLM Single-Frame Score, and (4) MLLM Attention Score, are also visualized. Furthermore, the advent of models with powerful reasoning capabilities [32, 63, 30, 31] has spurred pioneering efforts [ 64–67] to enhance visual understanding by leveraging and strengthening the model’s reasoning processes. 3 The HumanPCR Benchmark 3.1 Overview of HumanPCR We introduce HumanPCR benchmark to evaluate how MLLMs understand humans in real-world sce- narios. Definitions for each task, detailed implementation, and metadata of annotations are provided in Appendix A, B and C. understanding human actions and bodily movements, such as gestures and emotions; (2) Procedure: A hierarchical task taxonomy and a diverse human-centric vision- language corpus are first built on both an extensive survey of existing literature and the requirements observed in real-world scenarios. questions should require suffient visual evidence3, and exclude redundant visual content, going beyond simple concept retrieval; (2) Reasoning Necessity and Diversity: The YouTube subset is pre-filtered via domain-relevant tags and then manually reviewed before annotation to guarantee both content richness and safety. They are asked to create the questions with direct answers and explicitly outline the reasoning steps involved. Annotators are also permitted to flexibly select relevant video segments for each question, thereby enhancing contextual diversity and ensuring that the challenges remain grounded in realistic video contexts. 3.2.3 Quality Control and Verification For Human-P and Human-C, QA pairs are first filtered by LLMs to eliminate those solvable without visual input, followed by human verification conducted by trained annotators. For Human-R, reviewers begin by filling out a detailed checklist that probes each annotation’s objectivity, factual accuracy, non-redundancy, and complexity; they then assign a quantitative score and deliver targeted feedback to the annotator. This highlights our rigorous quality control procedures and the benchmark’s specialization in visual-centric reasoning, which requires the integration of multiple visual evidence as well as proactive inference. Recent benchmarks [40, 39, 87] that emphasize expert knowledge or multi-step reasoning often operate at a much lower level of visual-centric complexity than Human-R, as our manual analysis in Figure 1 shows: In contrast, Human-R is built on diverse, human-centric videos, where dense real-world activities and rich implicit rationales naturally support challenging multi-evidence reasoning, without sacrificing authenticity or content variety. On Human-R, we further include recent methods that advance video understanding, particularly in context extraction and enhanced reasoning[50, 64]. We report the average accuracy for each task, along with the macro-average accuracy of tasks for each dimension or level. Considering the results across all dimensions, persistent weaknesses appear on Posture, Contact, Behavior, Procedure, and reason- ing—all with accuracies around or below 50%. Poor results on Behavior and Procedure further expose limitations in temporal understanding and mind modeling, both critical for interpret- ing human activities and long-term events. (b) Detailed performance across tasks in the Contact and Procedure dimensions. Comparisons of advanced video understanding methods on Human-R and Video-MME[24], including RL-tuned Thinking[64, 66, 67] model and context extraction strategies ranged among Frame Selection[59, 61, 60], Down Pooling[58, 57], Memory&Retrieve[48, 103, 104], and Token Selection[50, 49, 62]. Model Method Reward Model Direct M=0 (CoT) M=1 M=2 M=3 Test-Time Compute: Scaling the number of 10 frames does not significantly improve reasoning accuracy, indicating that challenges in Human-R go beyond vanilla temporal retrieval of evidence. Does advanced video understanding configuration help? We evaluate MLLMs under advanced video-understanding configurations, context extraction addressing visual redundancy [49] , and test- time compute scaling [45, 32]. Figure 9 compares context extraction methods with uniformly sampled baselines on Human-R and Video- MME. Validated on Video-MME, most methods achieve only marginal or negative gains on Human-R. In particular, token selection and memory-based retrieval strategies show clear gaps in performance between the two datasets, while frame selection and pooling yield consistent improvements. We suggest that token and retrieval methods rely on text-guided token-level filtering, making them prone to missing proactive evidence beyond what the question refers to, unlike the more robust frame-level selection and pooling. This suggests that Human-R cannot be fully addressed by query-guided or heuristic methods, posing a new cha