REAL METHOD of "Dyslexify: A Mechanistic Defense Against Typographic Attacks in CLIP" (arXiv 2508.20570v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we analyze how CLIP vision encoders behave under typographic attacks, locating specialized attention heads in the latter half of the model’s layers that causally extract and transmit typographic informa- tion to the cls token. Building on these insights, we introduce Dyslexify – a method to defend CLIP models against typographic attacks by selectively ablating a typographic circuit, consisting of attention heads. Our method scales seamlessly to billion-parameter models, making it applicable to state-of-the-art multi-modal systems. • Mechanistic Understanding:We present the Typographic Attention Score to locate spe- cialized typographic attention heads and demonstrate their causal role in typographic attacks within CLIP models through controlled interventions. • Gradient-Free Defense:We introduce a method that utilizes circuit ablation to effectively defend against typographic attacks, while maintaining general visual capabilities. LOCATING LAYERS OF TYPOGRAPHIC UNDERSTANDING To better understand CLIP’s vulnerability to typographic attacks and to motivate our method, we begin by investigating which layers and components are responsible for typographic understanding using linear probes. Extending the ImageNet-100 dataset into the ImageNet-100-typo dataset, we can evaluate typographic understanding by training linear probes on the cls token embedding at each layer of OpenCLIP models, ranging in scale from ViT-B to ViT-bigG (Ilharco et al., 2021). Formally, for a layerℓwe define a linear probeP ℓ ˆyℓ(x) =w ⊤hℓ cls +b ,(1) where hℓ cls ∈R d denotes the activation of the model at layer ℓ on the cls token for an input sample x, and w and b are the probe’s weight vector and bias term, respectively. 2c shows that Acc(Pimg,ℓ) improves gradually over the layers, whileAcc(Ptypo,ℓ) exhibits a sharp performance rise around second half of the models layers. Attention layers consistently improve accuracy indicating that they add linearly decodable information to the cls token. Based on the finding in Section 3 that attention heads are responsible for adding typographic information, we only consider attention heads for the circuit construction. We define a circuit as a subsetC ⊆Ψ, whereΨdenotes the set of attention heads in CLIP Ψ ={H i,ℓ |i∈ {0, . , L}}(2) withIheads per layer andLlayers in total, whereH i,ℓ denote theith attention head in layerℓ. Investigating where typographic understanding emerges in CLIP.a)We train two linear probes on all layers of CLIP models. Each line in the shaded area represents one CLIP model.d)While attention layers seem to add linearly decodable information to the cls token, MLP layers remove or obscure information. (2024) we introduce the Typographic Attention Score Ti,ℓ to guide the circuit construction. Given a head Hi,ℓ and an input x, we write Ai,ℓ(x)∈[0,1] T+1 to denote the cls tokens attention pattern, where T is the number of spatial tokens and the additional entry corresponds to the cls token. For each candidate head H, we compute ∆Accimg =Acc(M, Dimg)−Acc(M C∪H, Dimg),(8) ∆Acctypo =Acc(M C∪H, Dtypo)−Acc(M C, Dtypo),(9) where ∆Accimg measures the accuracy drop on Dimg relative to the base model, and ∆Acctypo measures the incremental gain onD typo from adding headHto the current circuitC. 6:if∆Acc typo ≤0then 7:s←s+ 1; 8:ifs≥kthen break; end if 9:continue; 10:end if 11:if∆Acc img ≥ϵthen break; end if 12:AddH i,ℓ toC;s←0. For each attention head Hi,ℓ we extract the attention pattern A∗ i,ℓ(x) over this localized dataset. 1https://huggingface.co/datasets/wtcherr/unsplash 5 b) A small number of heads have high c) The probe accuracy spikes after layer with high a) Calculate Typographic Attention Score Attention Patterns 72.8% Highly attentive to Typography 22.5% Slightly attentive to Typography Slightly attentive to Typography 12.6% Not attentive to Typography high head Typographic understanding forms after high heads Figure 3: Analysis of the Typographic Attention Score.a)For each head in the model we calculate the Typographic Attention Score Ti,ℓ, utilizing the spatial bias in the Unsplash-typo dataset.b)Depiction of ViT-B’sTi,ℓ scores. While most attention heads do not show any spatial bias in their attention patterns, a few attention heads indicate significantly elevated scores, exceedingTi,ℓ ≥µ(T) + 2σ(T) . 5.2.1 DEMONSTRATING CAUSALITY OF TYPOGRAPHIC CIRCUITS We observe that attention heads in C utilize their cls self-attention as attention sinks (Xiao et al., 2023) depending on the presence of typography in the image. a) We set the cls token attention to α and rescale the spatial token attentions to sum to 1−α . Following their setup, we train the DP on the ImageNet-100-typo training split with a learning rate of 0.002, batch size of 64, and hyperparametersγ= 3.0andη= 1.0for 6 epochs. In contrast, our method focuses on key mechanisms relevant to typographic attacks, leading to more robust transfer across non-typographic benchmarks. For each method we show the accuracy followed by the deviation from the baseline, (↑) for improvement, (↓) for decline. Real Typographic Training Non-Typographic Method RTA-100 Disentangling PAINT ImageNet-100 Food-101 Aircraft Baseline 54.40 50.56 61.81 79.76 90.48 36.36 DP 62.20↑7.8082.78↑32.2071.82↑10.0181.70↑1.9489.83↓0.6532.94↓3.42 Dyslexify 71.00↑16.6060.56↑10.0076.36↑14.5579.52↓0.2489.31↓1.1734.62↓1.74 5.5 DEFENDINGAGAINSTTYPOGRAPHICATTACKS INMELANOMADETECTION Safety-critical domains such as medicine are particularly vulnerable, as AI decisions may impact human lives. We utilize the same setting as in Section 5.1 retrieving the typographic attention scores, but deviate from Section 5.2 in that we constructCby setting ISIC2019 asD img and ISIC2019-Typo asD typo. We reveal that a small number of attention heads located in the later layers of the vision encoder are responsible for the effectiveness of typographic attacks. B MLPLAYERS COMPRESS INFORMATION In Section 3, we observe that Acc(Pimg,ℓ) and Acc(Ptypo,ℓ) increases after attention layers, but consistently drops following MLP blocks. From a 5% split of the ImageNet-100-Typo training set, we extract residual stream activations for each layer. attention layers tend to increase both probe accuracy and intrinsic dimensionality, while MLP layers reduce them. 13 Attention Layers add information to the CLS tokens, while MLPs remove information from it Attention adds information a) This can be observed in the probe accuracy b) And in intrinsic dimensionality a