REAL METHOD of "Learning Efficient and Interpretable Multi-Agent Communication" (arXiv 2405.00839v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This heterogeneity creates a bottleneck, lengthening the overall training time due to straggler effects and potentially wasting spare resources of faster agents. To mini- mize training time in heterogeneous environments, we present a Communication-Efficient Training Workload Balancing for Decentralized Multi-Agent Learning (ComDML), which balances the workload among agents through a decentralized approach. Leveraging local-loss split training, ComDML enables parallel updates, where slower agents offload part of their workload to faster agents. variants, with large models such as ResNet-56 and ResNet-110, demonstrate that ComDML can significantly reduce the overall training time while maintaining model accuracy, compared to state-of-the-art methods. To address these issues, there is a growing trend towards cooperative training of machine learning models across a network of devices, eliminating the need to transfer the local training data. Federated Learning (FL) [1] algorithms have gained substantial attention as a privacy-preserving dis- tributed learning paradigm. The training process of FL, however, causes a major challenge when dealing with real-world resource-constrained devices (e.g., mobile/IoT devices and edge servers) that often exhibit heterogeneous computation and communication capacities, along with varying dataset sizes. To address the challenges due to the unbalanced workload on resource-constrained devices, different methods have been proposed recently. One popular approach involves splitting the global model into an agent-side model (consisting of the initial layers of a global model) and a server-side model (the remaining layers), where agents only need to train the smaller agent-side model using Split Learning (SL) [2], [3]. To address the latency and communication issues of SL, a federated SL algorithm is developed by incorporating local-loss-based training [4]. Along another line, agents can be segmented into tiers based on their training speed, and agents from the same tier are selected in each training round to mitigate the straggler problem [5], [6]. However, existing tier-based approaches [5], [6] require agents to train the entire global model locally, which is not scalable for training large models. For these methods [2]–[6], a central server is required to coordinate the training of all arXiv:2405.00839v1 [cs.LG] 1 May 2024 agents. In this paper, we propose a novel Communication-Efficient Training Workload Balancing for Decentralized Multi-Agent Learning (ComDML) that effectively addresses the challenges of training workload balancing in decentralized systems, op- erating without a server or coordinator. To reduce synchronization and communication overhead between paired agents, ComDML employs local-loss-based split training, where the paired agents can determine how to split the model and then train the split model in parallel. ComDML’s core objective is to minimize the overall training time. The scheduler prioritizes pairing the slowest agents first by maintaining a shared list of training times. Using standard assumptions in FL [13], [14] and local-loss- based training techniques [4], [15], we show the convergence of ComDML for both convex and non-convex functions. achieves a remarkable reduction in overall training time by up to 71% while maintaining model accuracy comparable to state- of-the-art methods. However, such processes face limitations when training large models on resource-constrained devices in het- erogeneous environments, leading to issues like the straggler problem. To address the straggler problem, [13] selects a smaller set of agents for training in each global iteration, but at the cost of increased training rounds. [26] deals with stragglers by ignoring the slowest 30% of agents, while FedProx [27] assigns different numbers of training rounds to agents. However, it is important to note that these methods do not explicitly con- sider agent heterogeneity and require agents to train the entire global model. In order, slower agents estimate training time and select an offloading strategy to pair with faster agents Flow of Intermediate data Local-loss training Model aggregation using All-Reduce 3 33 3 3 2 2 2 2 22 2 1 1 Paired agents 1 2 3 4 5 Fig. Within a DML system, multiple agents collaboratively train a global model using their local datasets and then synchronize with other agents to update the model. In practice, agents usually have heterogeneous computation resources as well as heterogeneous data, thus the training workload across agents can be highly different, which leads to very different training times. f (w) denotes the global objective function, and fi(w) represents the ith agent’s local objective function, which measures the individual loss over its hetero- geneous dataset using a loss function ℓ. However, these FL methods encounter challenges in training models on resource- constrained devices, especially large models in heterogeneous environments. Workload Balancing via Local-loss based Split Training To achieve efficient workload balancing for DML, we employ local-loss-based split training. The auxiliary network consists of additional layers connected to the slow agent-side model and is used to compute the local loss on the slow agent-side model. By incorporating the auxiliary network, we enable parallel model updates for each agent [4], avoiding the significant synchronization and communication overhead associated with split learning [2], which can significantly slow down the training process. The goal of the slower agent i is to find wam⋆ s i and wauxm i that minimize the loss function on the slow agent-side for each paired agent. This process continues until all agents have completed their training tasks in a training round. Optimization for Workload Balancing In a decentralized system with multiple agents, the objective of workload balancing is to minimize the overall training time. Using the proposed local-loss-based split training for workload balancing, we need to jointly optimize the communication and computation time when addressing these two key questions. As agents train their models in parallel, the training time in each round is determined by the slowest agent, denoted as max i τi. To minimize the overall training time, our objective is to minimize the maximum training time among all agents, as expressed in (5). Leveraging a list of indi- vidual training times, updated and maintained by each agent, agents