REAL METHOD of "Mobile-GS: Real-time Gaussian Splatting for Mobile Devices" (arXiv 2603.11531v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we propose a mobile-tailored real-time Gaussian Splatting method, dubbed Mobile-GS, enabling efficient inference of Gaussian Splatting on edge devices. Specifically, we first identify alpha blending as the primary computational bottleneck, since it relies on the time-consuming Gaussian depth sorting process. To solve this issue, we propose a depth-aware order-independent rendering scheme that eliminates the need for sorting, thereby substantially accelerating rendering. To address this problem, we propose a neural view-dependent enhancement strategy, en- abling more accurate modeling of view-dependent effects conditioned on view- ing direction, 3D Gaussian geometry, and appearance attributes. Furthermore, to facilitate deployment on memory-constrained mobile platforms, we also in- troduce first-order spherical harmonics distillation, a neural vector quantization technique, and a contribution-based pruning strategy to reduce the number of Gaussian primitives and compress the 3D Gaussian representation with the assis- tance of neural networks. Left:Runtime analysis of the orig- inal 3DGS highlights that the sorting operation incurs a significant computational overhead during inference.Right:Removing the sorting step substantially accelerates 3DGS, achieving several-fold speedup compared to the original implementation. 1 INTRODUCTION Neural Radiance Field (Mildenhall et al., 2021) is the first to leverage volume rendering for high- quality novel view synthesis (Barron et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2025), which has been applied to practical applications, like self-driving (Du et al., 2024a;b) and relighting (Wu et al., 2023). This limitation highlights the pressing need for efficient solutions to enable real-time Gaussian splatting on resource-constrained platforms, such as smartphones and AR headsets. Several lightweight 3D Gaussian Splatting methods, such as Scaffold-GS (Lu et al., 2024), Mini- Splatting (Fang & Wang, 2024), SplatFacto (Tancik et al., 2023), and C3DGS (Niedermayr et al., 2023) improve efficiency through pruning and compact representations. However, these methods rely on the traditional alpha blending, which requires a sorting process to render 3D Gaussians in the near-to-far order. In this work, we propose a real-time Gaussian Splatting method tailored for mobile devices, named Mobile-GS. To circumvent the computationally intensive sorting process in- herent in traditional alpha blending, we propose a depth-aware order-independent rendering tech- nique, enabling faster rendering. Therefore, we introduce a spherical 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 harmonic distillation technique to distill the first-order SH parameters under the guidance of the pre- trained teacher model, thus achieving faster rendering speed and lower storage usage. We demonstrate that our method, deployed on mobile devices, achieves real-time rendering speed. Our method consistently surpasses previous lightweight approaches, achieving state-of-the-art rendering speed and visually pleasing quality. MVGS (Du et al., 2026) is the first to pro- pose multi-view learning to enhance the multi-view constraint of 3DGS in the optimization stage, which significantly improves the holistic rendering performance. Traditional methods to achieve this either successively extract depth layers, known as depth peeling (Bavoil & Myers, 2008), or store and sort fragment lists using A- buffers (Carpenter, 1984). Similar to depth peeling, k-buffer methods similarly have different depth layers but store and accumulate only the firstklayers in a single rendering pass (Bavoil et al., 2007). Instead, we first compute the color of each 3D Gaussian for its related pixels in parallel and accumulate the color value for each pixel. To address these limitations, we propose a more efficient compression framework that preserves essential Gaussian features while achieving compact attribute representation, making it particularly suitable for deployment on resource-constrained mobile devices. First, by removing the dependency on sorting, the proposed method enables efficient and parallel accumulation of Gaussian contributions, resulting in significantly faster rendering. 4, we design a lightweight multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that predicts the view- dependent opacity scalar for each Gaussian. To be specific, for a given 3D Gaussian posi- tionµ i, we compute its direction from the camera center and normalize the final result to obtain the Camera-Gaussian vectorP i = µi−tv ∥µi−tv∥, wheret v means the center of thev-th training camera. Different from that, in this work, we introduce a first-order spherical harmonics (3×4coefficients) distillation framework that encourages a more compact model to approximate the directional radiance of a powerful teacher model viaL dstill = 1 |P| P p∈P Ctea p −C p wherePdenotes the set of pixels.C tea andCrepresent the rendered pixel colors from the teacher and student, respectively. Unlike traditional vector quantization methods that operate on the entire at- tribute vector using a single codebook, our method adopts a sub-vector decomposition strategy (Lee et al., 2025) that enhances representation flexibility and compression efficiency. To further compress the final quantized attributes for storage, we apply Huffman coding to encode sequences at the end of training. This entropy-based compression technique significantly reduces the bitstream size without compromising runtime performance, enabling the deployment of our method on storage-constrained devices. L=L rgb +λ distillLdistill +λ depthLdepth,(10) whereλ distill andλ depth balance the weight between the rendered image loss, the distillation loss, and the depth loss. To improve holistic rendering per- formance, we adopt multi-view training (Du et al., 2026) for more powerful multi-view constraints to 3D Gaussian primitives. To evaluate the efficiency of our method on resource-constrained devices, we implement our approach using Vulkan 2.0, a modern, cross-platform graphics and compute API. These methods cannot achieve high-quality novel view synthesis in terms of rendering performance and efficiency, while our proposed method can achieve comparable per- formance compared with 3DGS. Although our proposed Mobile-GS requires more training time, its high-quality rendering and real-time infer- ence speed make it more suitable for mobile devices compared to existing methods. By integrating both factors, our method achieves a 9 P