REAL METHOD of "Instilling an Active Mind in Avatars via Cognitive Simulation" (arXiv 2508.19209v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Second, to ensure the effective fusion of these multimodal inputs and mitigate inter-modality conflicts, we introduce a specialized Multimodal DiT architecture with a novel Pseudo Last Frame design. In contrast, our method simulates both systems, generating diverse and naturally coherent behaviors that are semantically aligned with the provided audio and text. they first pre-train a foundational video generation model [55, 70] and then introduce conditional audio inputs to achieve animation. First, to ensure a comprehensive simulation of both System 1 and System 2, we introduce an agentic system powered by MLLMs. Furthermore, we introduce a distinct identity preservation strategy that avoids conditioning on the reference image during training. Our method not only achieves highly competitive results on standard benchmarks but is also significantly preferred in user studies for its contextual 3 naturalness and plausibility. The first category consists of methods based on pre-trained text- to-image U-Net models [6, 12]. These approaches typically insert temporal modules, such as attention or convolution layers, into the frozen U-Net backbone and then fine-tune the model on video data [18, 73]. This allows them to leverage powerful image priors, but their capabilities can be constrained by the original image-centric architecture. As the motion generation step is largely bypassed in these methods, their focus shifts to achieving high-fidelity rendering. Our model is built upon a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) backbone [13, 16, 51, 55], which is first pre-trained [16] on general video generation tasks to acquire foundational video generation capabilities. To resolve modal conflicts, this architecture incorporates a pseudo-last-frame identity strategy, which prevents the static reference image from interfering with dynamic motion during training. Our framework operates in the compact latent space of a pre-trained 3D VAE [90] and is trained with a flow matching [41] objective. 3.2 Agentic Reasoning for Deliberative Control Module Inputs and Outputs.To model the deliberative nature of “System 2”, our Agentic Reasoning module reasons over the input conditions to generate high-level, logically coherent guidance. (b,c) Our proposedMM-Branch Warm-up and Pseudo Last Frame methods mitigate multimodal conflicts during training. The rationale was that cross-modal attention in the transformer layers would enrich these audio token representations with high-level semantics (e.g., inferred emotion and intent) while preserving their original temporal structure. Unlike purely reactive methods that merely emulate “System 1”, our approach further integrates deliberative reasoning from “System 2” to provide thoughtful, top-down guidance. While early works used dedicated networks [24, 67, 99] and recent methods reuse model parameters [36, 40], both approaches inject a reference image sampled from the training video. As shown in the bottom right of Figure 2, during training, we probabilistically condition the model on both the GT first and last frames of the video clip, as these are both native signals. Instead of injecting audio features via additional cross-attention layers, we introduce a dedicated audio branch, architecturally symmetric to the video and text branches. All three modalities are then fused at each layer through ashared multi-head self-attention mechanism. This symmetric architecture, while beneficial, introduces a training challenge. Our model is based on the MMDiT architecture and was pre-trained on a large-scale dataset of text-video/image pairs. The training was conducted on 256 compute nodes and consisted of three stages: Training Data.Our training set consists of 15,000 hours of filtered video data. Evaluation Metrics.To comprehensively assess our method, we employ a multi-faceted evaluation protocol that includes both objective and subjective metrics. The first was apairwise comparison, where participants viewed two videos from different methods in a randomized order. Lip-sync Inconsistency (LSI), Motion Unnaturalness (MU), and Image Distortion (ID), allowing us to compute a defect rate for each. (1) the agentic reasoning module and (2) the proposed conditioning architecture within our diffusion model. The Effectiveness of Agentic Reasoning.Here, we analyze the contribution of the Agentic Reasoning module by dissecting its intermediate steps. We conduct experiments by first removing the multi-step reasoning process, then ablating the entire Analyzer, and finally, removing the reasoning module altogether, which results in a “System 1 only” model. These findings support the effectiveness of our Agentic Reasoning module, particularly in its ability to enhance the plausibility and semantic motion naturalness of the generated animations, which are qualities not fully captured by objective metrics. 9 Method Subjective Evaluation Quantitative Metrics DA↑ LSI↓ MU↓ GSB↑ IQA↑ ASE↑ Sync-D↓ HKC↑ HKV↑ InterActHuman - - - - 4.574 3.643 8.163 0.553 103.91 Ours w/o Reasoning 0.88 0.13 0.63 -0.26 4.576 3.631 7.541 0.611 138.43 Ours (Full Model) 0.94 0.04 0.12 +0.26 4.529 3.653 6.904 0.614 158.36 Table 3 Comparison with existing methods on multi-person animation. using standard cross-attention for audio integration instead of our MM-Attention, removing the MM-Warmup strategy, conditioning on a reference image and omitting the pseudo-last-frame at inference. To further validate our approach, (b) of the Table 2 presents a direct subjective comparison against OmniHuman-1 [40], a state-of-the-art method that utilizes a reference attention mechanism and standard cross-attention for audio injection instead of our proposed conditioning implementation. The results show that our method achieves a significant advantage not only in the overall GSB score but also across multiple fine-grained dimensions, including lip-sync accuracy, motion naturalness, and visual quality. First, we condition the synthesis on a speaker-specific mask that directs audio feature injection exclusively to the masked regions during the multimodal attention process. Specifically, our method shows a clear advantage on metrics measuring gesture motion dynamics (HKC and HKV) and achieves better lip-sync accuracy. (Left) a best-choice selection task comparing our method against academic baselines, and (Right) a GSB pairwise comparison against leading proprietary models. 4.4 Comparison among Recent Methods Comparisons with State-of-the-Art Meth