REAL METHOD of "Efficient Learning on Large Graphs using a Densifying Regularity Lemma" (arXiv 2504.18273v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our method allows for efficient approximation of large graphs that are both directed and sparse, a crucial capability for many real-world applications. We then introduce a graph neural network architecture operating on the IBG representation of the graph and demonstrating competitive performance on node classification, spatio-temporal graph analysis, and knowledge graph completion, while having memory and computational complexity linear in the number of nodes rather than edges. Traditional Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs), which form the backbone of most graph signal processing architectures, scale their computational and memory requirements linearly with thenumber of edges. In these settings, both empirical and theoretical work has shown that directionality is key and can significantly boost GNN performance and expressive power (Rossi et al., 2024; Bechler-Speicher et al., 2025) Our contribution.We introduce a new procedure for approximating general directed graphs G with adjacency matrices A∈ {0,1}N×N by low-rank matrices C that have a special interpretation: Our approach, which is an extension of the ICG method (Finkelshtein et al., 2024a), is different from other forms of the WRL in a number of ways: • While some variants of the WRL only prove existence (László Miklós Lovász, 2007), we find the approximating low-rank graph as the solution to an “easy to optimize” loss function (hence our approach isconstructive). 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • While some versions of the WRL (Frieze & Kannan, 1999) propose an algorithm that provably obtains the approximating low-rank matrix, these algorithms are exponentially slow and not applicable in practice (for example, see Section 7 of Finkelshtein et al. Instead, the loss function we introduce can be efficiently optimized via gradient descent. While the optimization procedure is not guaranteed to find the global minimum since the loss is non-convex, it nevertheless produces high-quality approximations in practice (hence the termsemi-constructive). Hence, the number of communities in our methodis independent of any property of the graph, including the number of nodes and sparsity level. We stress that as opposed to naive densification approaches, our method improvesboth computational complexity and accuracy. For background on the predecessor of our method, ICG (Finkelshtein et al., 2024a), see Appendix A. For a comparison of our method with ICG, see Sections J and M.2.1. We define a weighted adjacency matrix Q that assigns a weight e to non-edges and 1 to edges. 4.5 THE LEARNING PIPELINE WITHIBGS When learning on large graphs using IBGs, the first step is fitting an IBG to the given graph. IBG Neural Networks.We propose an IBG-based architecture (IBG-NN) defined as follows. Then, for layers0≤ℓ≤L−1, the node features are defined by H (ℓ+1) s =σ  Θs 1  H (ℓ) s  + Θs 2  V B(ℓ)  ,H (ℓ+1) t =σ  Θt 1  H (ℓ) t  + Θt 2  U F(ℓ)  , and require O(D(N K+KD+N D)) operations. The final representation, used for node-level predictions, is taken as H (L) =H (L) s +H (L) t , where Θ1 and Θ2 are MLPs or multiple layers of deepsets, F (ℓ),B (ℓ) ∈R K×D (ℓ) are taken as trainable parameters, and σ is a non-linearity. We then train a model on the frozen IBG to predict the next-step signal from past time steps. Hence, the ICG method falls short for sparse graphs Our IBG method solves this shortcoming and more. For example, a main contribution of our method is a densification mechanism, supported by our novel densifying cut similarity measure and our densifying regularity lemma, which is a non-trivial continuation and extension of the semi- constructive weak regularity lemma of Finkelshtein et al. Furthermore, while conventional reduction methods process representations on either an iteratively coarsened graph or mappings between the full and reduced graphs, IBG-NNs incorporate fine-grained node information at every layer, leading to richer representations. The training set in graph completion consists of the edges E ∩ Mand the non-edges E c ∩ M. Typical methods, such as VGAE (Kipf & Welling, 2016) and TLC-GNN (Yan et al., 2021), define a loss of the form l(B) = X (n,m)∈M∩E cn,mψ1(bn,m, an,m) + X (n,m)∈M∩E c cn,mψ2(bn,m, an,m), where ψ1, ψ2 :R 2 →R + are dyad-wise loss functions and cn,m ∈R + are weights. To calculate the first term efficiently, we can either perform matrix multiplication from right to left or compute U ⊤U and V ⊤V , followed by the rest of the product. To efficiently calculate the leading left and right singular vectors, we may use power method variants such as the Lanczos algorithm (Saad, 2011) or simultaneous iteration (Trefethen & Bau, 2022) in O(E) operations per iteration. For very large graphs, we propose in Section G.2 a more efficient randomized SVD algorithm that does not require reading the whole graph into memory at once. In the following subsection, we introduce a Monte Carlo algorithm for computing the SVD of a matrix by processing only a random small fraction of its rows, significantly reducing memory requirements. 33 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 G.2 MONTECARLOSVDALGORITHM For very large graphs, it is impossible to load the whole graph to GPU memory and estimate the SVD with standard algorithms. Instead, we propose here a randomized SVD algorithm which loads the matrix to GPU memory in small enough chunks. We hence start with a basic randomized eigendecomposition algorithm for symmetric matrices, based on the simultaneous iteration (also called the block power method) (Trefethen & Bau, 2022, Part V). Given a symmetric matrix C, the standardsimultaneous iteration(Algorithm 1) is an algorithm for finding the leading (largest in their absolute values) M eigenvector-eigenvalue pairs of C. We hence consider aMonte Carlo simultaneous iteration algorithm, which is identical to Algorithm 1 with the exception that the matrix-vector productZ=CQis approximated by[CQ] m. Algorithm 1Simultaneous Iteration for Eigendecomposition of Symmetric Matrix Input:Matrix C∈R N×N , number of leading eigenvalues to be computed M, number of iterationsJ. However, in the Monte Carlo simultaneous iteration algorithm, the algorithm separates the two dimensional spaces of B to one-dimensional spaces arbitrarily due to the inexact Monte Carlo matrix product. Instead, we apply the Monte Carlo eigendecomposition algorithm on B+λ 1I, where λ1 is the largest eigenvalue of B, computed by a Monte Carlo power iterat