REAL METHOD of "VUDG: A Dataset for Video Understanding Domain Generalization" (arXiv 2505.24346v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Hence, we propose Video Understanding Domain Generalization (VUDG), a novel dataset designed specifically for evaluating the DG performance in video understanding. We propose a multi-expert progressive annotation framework to annotate each video with both multiple-choice and open-ended question-answer pairs. Extensive experiments on 9 representative large video-language models (LVLMs) and several traditional video question answering methods show that most models (including state-of-the-art LVLMs) suffer performance degradation under domain shifts. Existing methods have shown outstanding performance in diverse tasks such as action recognition [1, 2, 3], video captioning [4, 5, 6, 7], and video question answering (VideoQA) [8, 9, 10]. However, most existing methods typically ignore the inherent domain shifts encountered in real-world video applications, which assume the same distribution between training and testing data. This problem could be formulated as the task of domain generalization (DG) [11, 12, 13] in video understanding, where the model trained on training data (source domain) is expected to perform well on unseen testing data (target domain) with different distributions. In recent years, this task has received increasing attention with the urgent demand to apply Large Video Language Models (LVLMs) to downstream video understanding tasks, while the performance of LVLMs may degrade due to the distribution differences between the training and unseen testing data. To address this issue, we propose Video Understanding Domain Generalization (VUDG), a dataset specifically designed to evaluate the performance of domain generalization in video understanding. Note that we collect both the training and testing data for each domain to avoid the potential data leakage issue in evaluating LVLMs, and they are collected from distinct data sources. We propose a progressive multi-expert annotation framework for video annotation. Firstly, we select 11 domains and summarize a list of human daily activity scenes as the semantic space by brainstorming, and then employ Qwen2.5-VL-7B [22] to select videos from existing video source datasets. These open-ended QA pairs are then used to generate multiple-choice options by DeepSeek-v3. Finally, we ask humans to review and correct the uncertain or erroneous samples identified in the previous step to obtain high-quality QA pairs. In addition, we can also measure the zero-shot generalization performance of video understanding methods using only the testing data of each domain. • We introduce VUDG, the first dataset for evaluating domain generalization in video under- standing, which contains 11 different domains, including videos with varying visual styles, viewpoints, and environmental conditions. • We propose a progressive multi-expert annotation framework that sequentially combines multiple expert models and human experts for annotation generation and filtering, effectively obtaining high-quality open-ended and multiple-choice QA pairs. However, these datasets ignore scenarios where the distributions of the training and testing data are inconsistent, leaving the problem of domain generalization underexplored. Ani-GIFs [32] presents the first synthetic DG dataset using animated GIFs and real videos to study domain shift in action recognition. total number of videos (Videos) and video clips (Clips), number of QA pairs (QA Pairs), annotation method (Anno., where M/A indicates manual/automatic), whether the videos contain diverse domains (Dom.), and whether the semantic spaces across domains are similar (Sem.). To ensure high-quality data, we propose a progressive multi-expert annotation framework that leverages multiple large models, followed by human review for question-answer pairs generation and filtering. 3.1 Video Collection We define 11 domains for video collection, including cartoon, game, movie/TV show, virtual envi- ronment, egocentric, surveillance, shaky, foggy, night, rainy, and snowy. Then, we collect videos from various data sources based on the domain name. To eliminate potential data leakage (since LVLMs are pre-trained on a large amount of data), we create training and testing sets for each domain and ensure a clear separation between them by collecting them from different data sources. The training set is constructed exclusively from the training sets of existing open- source datasets, including InternVid [20], ShareGPT4Video [21], VideoInstruct100K [40], and MMDL [19]. We have checked that no data from these sources overlaps with existing benchmarks (used as the testing set), ensuring strict separation between the training and testing data in VUDG. All subsequent processes, such as QA pairs generation and filtering, are applied uniformly to all the collected videos, without further distinguishing between the training set and the testing set. 3.2 Question and Answer Generation The question and answer generation process comprises 3 steps: To generate open-ended QA pairs, we first leverage Gemini- 2.5-Flash, a fast and cost-effective multimodal model with strong video understanding capabilities. For each video, we generate one question for each of the question categories (1)–(3) and two questions for the question categories (4). To reduce memory usage during training, all training videos are limited to a maximum duration of ten minutes. For multiple domain generalization, one domain is used as the target domain using its testing set, while the training sets of the remaining N − 1 domains are treated as source domains for training. For single domain generalization, the training set of one domain is used as the source domain for training, and the left N − 1 domains are treated as target domains using their testing sets. We then compute the accuracy of a model on each domain and quantify the final performance by averaging the results on all domains. Specifically, we adopt task- specific evaluation protocols to evaluate from two aspects, with a total score of 5 points for each aspect and a maximum score of 10 for each question. For training on the VUDG training set, we apply full-parameter fine- tuning to non-LLM-based methods and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [ 51] to LVLMs to ensure training efficiency. Firstly, non-LLM-based methods (HBI [42] and EMCL4QA [43]) achieve poor performance, indicating their limited generalization ability when exposed to out-of-distribution domains. Secondly, LLM-based methods show signifi- cantly better gene