REAL METHOD of "Generate Any Scene: Scene Graph Driven Data Synthesis for Visual Generation Training" (arXiv 2412.08221v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

SCENE GRAPH DRIVEN DATA SYNTHESIS FORVISUALGENERATIONTRAINING Ziqi Gao1∗, Weikai Huang1∗, Jieyu Zhang1, Aniruddha Kembhavi2, Ranjay Krishna1,2 1University of Washington, 2Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence Code:https://github.com/RAIVNLab/GenerateAnyScene Dataset: We introduce GENERATEANYSCENE, a data engine that systematically enumerates scene graphs representing the combinatorial array of possible visual scenes. Given a sampled scene graph, GENERATEANYSCENEtranslates it into a caption for text-to-image or text-to-video generation; it also translates it into a set of visual question answers that allow automatic evaluation and reward modeling of semantic alignment. Using GENERATEANYSCENE, we first design a self-improving framework where models iteratively enhance their performance using generated data.SDv1.5achieves an average4%improvement over baselines and surpasses fine-tuning on CC3M. Second, we also design a distillation algorithm to transfer specific strengths from proprietary models to their open-source counterparts. Using GRPO algorithm, we fine-tune SimpleAR-0.5B-SFT and surpass CLIP-based methods by+5%on DPG-Bench. Finally, we apply these ideas to the downstream task of content moderation where we train models to identify challenging cases by learning from synthetic data. We hypothesize that these limitations stem not only from architectural bottlenecks but more fun- damentally from the lack of structured, compositionally rich training data Betker et al. 1 arXiv:2412.08221v4 [cs.CV] 17 Mar 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Nevertheless, manual curation of such dense compositional annotations is labor-intensive, while automatic annotation methods (e.g., via MLMs) suffer from hallucination and semantic noise. Constructing a compositional dataset requires that we first definethe space of the visual content. We introduce GENERATEANYSCENE, a system capable of efficiently enumerating the space of scene graphs representing a wide range of visual scenes. In particular, we first construct a rich taxonomy of visual concepts consisting of28,787objects,1,494attributes, 10,492 relations, 2,193 scene attributes from various sources. By automating these steps, our system ensures both scalability and adaptability, providing researchers and developers with diverse, richly detailed scene graphs and corresponding captions tailored to their specific needs. Given a model, we generate multiple images, identify the highest-scoring one, and use it as new fine-tuning data to improve the model itself. (2022a) and achieve an average of4%performance boost compared with original models, and this method is even better than fine-tuning with the same amount of real images and captions from the Conceptual Captions CC3M over different benchmarks. Then we propose a low-cost scene graph-based reward model for RLHF Ouyang et al. Our method enables fine-grained, compositional reward modeling without manual annotation or heavy LLM inference. (2025) using a scene graph reward model, achieving better compositional alignment than CLIP-based methods Radford et al. Scene graph structure enumeration.Our engine pre-computes a library of directed scene- graph topologies subject to user-specifiedstructural constraints: We first sample the number of object nodes and then systematically enumerate feasible edge sets and attribute attachments that satisfy these constraints. Populate the scene graph structure with metadata.Given a generated scene graph structure, the next step involves populating the graph with metadata. Translate scene graph to caption.We introduce a deterministic and programmatic algorithm that converts scene graphs with scene attributes into captions. The generation pipeline of GENERATEANYSCENE.Step 1:Enumerate diverse scene graph structures under user-defined constraints.Step 2:Populate structures with sampled objects, attributes, and relations.Step 3:Sample scene attributes such as style, perspective, or time span. Step 4:Translate scene graph and attributes into coherent captions.Step 5:Automatically generate QA pairs covering all elements for evaluation and reward modeling. From each set of 10K optimal images, we then select the top 25% (2.5K image-caption pairs) as the training data for each epoch. Fine-tuning with GENERATEANYSCENEyields higher CLIPScore and ImageReward while preserving LPIPS, demonstrating that our method not only strengthens compositional alignment but also improves global semantic fidelity and perceptual quality without reducing generation diversity. For each concept, we gather all captions in which it appears and average their generation scores to obtain a concept-level score for each model. GENERATEANYSCENErewards outperform CLIP.As shown in Table 4, our method outperforms both SFT and CLIP-RL models and achieves a significant improvement, demonstrating superior compositional faithfulness driven by explicit scene graph rewards. (2022) model with a single-layer linear classifier and compared models trained with samples solely from D3 against those trained with samples from both GENERATEANYSCENEandD 3. Based onText-to-Image generation method,Text-to-Video generationmodels typically utilize time-aware architectures to ensure temporal coherence across frames Guo et al. For example, training methods like LLM-Grounded Diffusion Lian et al. The fine-tuning process was executed for one epoch, with a maximum of 2500 training steps. To accommodate the reduced dataset size, the maximum training steps were set to 1000. We sample 10K images from VQAv2, with corresponding QA pairs, matched them to COCO2017 captions, and apply same training frameworks to SimpleAR-0.5B-SFT with RL training. Method Basic↑Advanced↑All↑ SimpleAR-0.5B-SFT 0.74 0.60 0.66 SimpleAR-0.5B-RL (CLIP)0.750.60 0.67 SimpleAR-0.5B-RL (VQAv2) 0.73 0.59 0.66 SimpleAR-0.5B-RL (Ours)0.75 0.61 0.68 Findings.The results show that using VQAv2 captions and QA pairs as rewards yields even lower performance than CLIP-based RL training. This highlights the inherent difficulty and cost of constructing high-quality image-caption and QA annotations, whereas our method leverages scene-graph structures to systematically generate synthetic caption-QA pairs at minimal cost with unique advantages. Detector architecture and trainingWe employed ViT-T Wu et al. Their pretrained parameters on ImageNet-21K were frozen, and the final classification head was replaced with a linear layer using a sigmoid activation function