REAL METHOD of "FOCUS: Efficient Keyframe Selection for Long Video Understanding" (arXiv 2510.27280v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Popular pipelines therefore either uniformly subsample or apply keyframe selection with retrieval-style scoring using smaller vision-language models. We propose FOCUS,Frame-Optimistic Confidence Upper-bound Selection, a training-free, model-agnostic keyframe selection module that selects query-relevant frames under a strict token budget. The resulting two-stage exploration-exploitation procedure reduces from a sequential policy with theoretical guarantees, first identifying high-value temporal regions, then selecting top-scoring frames within each region. Recent methods address this by scoring frame relevance with pre-trained vision-language encoders (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) or BLIP (Li et al., 2022)) and then pick the highest-relevance 1 arXiv:2510.27280v2 [cs.CV] 24 Nov 2025 FOCUS: These text-image matching approaches are typically training-free and plug in easily before the visual encoder in MLLM stacks, retrieving frames with higher relevance other than uniform sampling. In this work, we propose FOCUS,Frame-Optimal Con- fidence Upper-Bound Selection, a training-free, plug- and-play keyframe selection method designed to pro- cess extremely long videos with minimal computational overhead. Concretely, for each video-query pair we compute a frame-level relevance sequence{rt}, where rt is the co- sine similarity between the visual embedding of frame t and the text embedding of the query produced by BLIP. (1) We formulate query-aware keyframe selection as a budgetedcombinatorial pure-exploration(CPE) problem in a multi-armed bandit setting; (2) We introduce FOCUS, a training-free, model-agnostic keyframe selection module that selects query- 2 FOCUS: Oracle and Surrogate Objective.The oracle objective choosesKto maximize expected utility: We therefore posit that yt is indirectly observable via a vision-language encoder ψ that outputs a relevance score rt =ψ(x t, q;θ) =yt +ϵ ψ, where ϵψ denotes encoder-induced noise. This computational constraint motivates us to model keyframe selection under budget constraints, where we strategically allocate a limited sampling budget to identify the most promising temporal segments before producing the final set of k keyframes. .do 6:A n ←TopM( ˆµ, m) 7:Compute confidence radiusβ a(n)for alla∈ A▷ β a(n)defined in equation 5 8:fora←1toMdo 9:ifa∈A n then 10:˜µ a(n)←ˆµa(n)−β a(n) 11:else 12:˜µ a(n)←ˆµa(n) +β a(n) 13:end if 14:end for 15: We then update the empirical means ˆµa and compute the confidence radius βa(n) for each arm a. To be specific, for arm a∈A n, we compute the lower confidence bound of the empirical mean,i.e., LCBa(n) = ˆµa(n)−β a(n); for arm a /∈An, we compute the upper confidence bound of the empirical mean,i.e., UCBa(n) = ˆµa(n) +β a(n). To make the procedure practical and easy to parallelize, we specialize Algorithm 1 into the two-stage, batch variant in Algorithm 2. For each arm a with index set Ta and observed rewards {ra,s}s∈Sa at sampled indices Ta ⊆T a, we simply interpolate all rewards ˆra,t within the arm using the nearest-neighbor assignment. To ensure fair comparison (Tang et al., 2025), we disable subtitles, perform zero-shot evaluation, and keep model parameters frozen—varying only the frame selection strategy (our method versus uniform sampling). The suffix “w/Ours” denotes models using keyframes selected by our method; otherwise, frames are uniformly sampled.#Frameindicates the number of frames provided to the MLLM, andLLMdenotes the language model size. our method assumes that frame-level relevance scores are i.i.d., a common setting in multi-armed bandit formulations. Consequently, retrieval-based methods for keyframe selection typically require regularization (Tang et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2024) to promote diversity and ensure coverage. Comparison between our method and state-of-the-art keyframe selection baselines under matched keyframe count. To further validate the effectiveness of FOCUS, we compare it against state-of-the-art training-free keyframe selection methods on both LongVideoBench and Video-MME. Computes relevance scores between each frame and the query, then selects the top- K scoring frames. Due to computational constraints, we apply a pre-filtering step by downsampling videos to 1 frame per second. (i) evaluating all methods using LLaV A- Video-7B, the best-performing MLLM in our setup; (ii) fixing the number of selected keyframes to k= 64 ; (iii) using the same vision-language encoder (e.g., BLIP) for frame scoring whenever possible. 4 CONCLUSION We addressed the core bottleneck of long-video understanding in MLLMs—the explosion of visual tokens—by introducing FOCUS, a training-free, plug-and-play keyframe selection method that 9 FOCUS: FOCUSfirst partitions the video into temporal clips, treats each as an arm in a bandit problem, and then identifies query-relevant regions via a combinatorial pure- exploration strategy using empirical means and Bernstein confidence bounds. 5 REPRODUCIBILITYSTATEMENT We provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis of our method in Appendix B and Appendix C. Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. A.1.2 VISION-LANGUAGEPRETRAINEDMODELS Cross-modal vision-language pretraining spans two-stream fusion, single-stream fusion, dual-encoder contrastive learning, and encoder-decoder hybrids. Two-stream models such as ViLBERT (Lu et al., 2019) and LXMERT (Tan & Bansal, 2019) encode vision and text separately and fuse via cross- attention, while single-stream counterparts—VisualBERT (Li et al., 2019), VL-BERT (Su et al., 2020), UNITER (Chen et al., 2020)—concatenate region features with text in a unified Transformer using MLM and alignment losses. Hybrid objectives combine contrastive and generative training (Li et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2023) unify captioning and VQA. VideoBERT (Sun et al., 2019) pairs frame sequences with transcripts in a BERT-style objective for retrieval and script generation, while HERO (Li et al., 2020) and ClipBERT (Lei et al., 2021) improve efficiency via hierarchical encoding and key-frame sampling for video-text retrieval and QA. Building directly on large image-text models, Clip4Clip (Luo et al., 2022) reuses CLIP encoders and matches videos to text via contrastive similarity, and FrozenBiLM (Yang et al., 2022) freezes a bi-directional LM while aligning a video encoder for zero-shot VQA. Training-free keyframe selection.Recenttraining-freemethods l