REAL METHOD of "WMPO: World Model-based Policy Optimization for Vision-Language-Action Models" (arXiv 2511.09515v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduceWorld-Model-based Policy Optimization (WMPO), a principled framework for on- policy VLA RL without interacting with the real environment. In contrast to widely used latent world models, WMPO focuses on pixel-based predictions that align the“imagined"trajectories with the VLA features pretrained with web-scale images. Crucially, WMPO enables the policy to perform on-policy GRPO that provides stronger performance than the often-used off-policy methods. The dominant approach for training these models is imitation learning (IL) from large-scale human demonstrations [4]. While effective in mimicking demonstrated behaviors, IL-trained policies are often brittle. When encountering out-of-distribution states not seen during training, they can take suboptimal actions that lead to compounding errors [5], making task completion or recovery nearly impossible (Fig. The first leverages human intervention to guide learning [7–9], which reduces exploration cost but is labor-intensive and hard to scale. Many classical model-based RL approaches [15–20] operate in an abstract latent space, which creates a fundamental mismatch with powerful VLA foundation models that are pretrained on real-world images. The rich, pretrained visual understanding of VLAs cannot be directly applied within a mismatched latent dynamics model. We argue that leveraging a pixel-space video-generative world model is crucial, as it allows the VLA policy to operate on generated visual data that is consistent with its pretraining, effectively bridging the world model with the policy’s pre-trained knowledge. To this end, we propose World Model-based Policy Optimization (WMPO), as illustrated in Fig. By pretraining a high-fidelity, pixel-space video-generative model on millions of robotic trajectories[21], WMPO leverages realistic visual dynamics to create a scalable training environment for downstream tasks. First, to mitigate the state-distribution mismatch between expert demonstrations and policy rollouts, we introduce policy behavior alignment, finetuning the world model with behavioral data collected by the policy itself. To address this, WMPO generates complete trials through clip-level autoregressive video generation, enabling more reliable outcome-based reward assignment. Third, we train a lightweight reward model that predicts task success or failure, providing a learned sparse reward signal and avoiding both complex reward shaping and reward hacking. Notably, WMPO naturally supports repeated rollouts from the same initial state, which is difficult to realize in the physical world but crucial for large-scale GRPO training. Our results show that WMPO achieves substantially higher sample 2 efficiency and consistently outperforms VLA RL methods that directly optimize with real trajectories. Crucially, we provide qualitative evidence of emergent behaviors, where the WMPO-trained policy demonstrates self- correction strategies not present in the demonstration data and often completes tasks faster and more smoothly, without noticeable stalls. We further demonstrate WMPO’s strong generalization compared to offline RL methods, as well as its capacity for lifelong learning through alternating updates between the VLA policy and the world model. Most VLAs build upon pretrained vision-language models (VLMs) and are further fine-tuned on robotic trajectories, thereby inheriting strong visual grounding and language understanding. The first introduces human intervention to guide exploration, e.g., supplying corrective signals when policies encounter unrecoverable states [8, 9, 26]. These approaches avoid human supervision but still suffer from poor sample efficiency, and constructing accurate simulators for each real-world scenario introduces prohibitive engineering overhead. In contrast, WMPO addresses these challenges through policy behavior alignment and, for the first time, verifies the feasibility of leveraging high-fidelity world models for scalable VLA RL. 3 World Model-Based Policy Optimization We introduce World Model-based Policy Optimization (WMPO), a novel framework for learning complex, vision-based robotic manipulation policies. WMPO operates directly in the pixel space, instead of latent space, which better bridges the pretrained VLA features from web-scale video-action pairs with the “imagined" trajectories. Specifically, the world model is trained to accurately reflect the policy’s behavior through a process we call Policy Behavior Alignment, where it is fine-tuned on a small set of real trajectories collected 3 s 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑐ℎ𝑢𝑛𝑘 𝑎𝑡 Buffer ℬ Trajectory … Trajectory Trajectory Reward Model 𝑅𝜓 Group Computation ... 2 illustrates an overview of the training procedure of WMPO. Our objective is to train a policy πθ(a|s )such that the predicted cumulative return of the imagined trajectories will be maximized max θ Eτ∼π θ,pϕ [Rψ(τ)].(1) This formulation highlights a general paradigm: When applying the imagined trajectory to VLA optimization, we decode the images back into pixel space to better leverage the pretrained knowledge, rather than retraining the VLA in a new latent space such as that from RSSM [18]. during training, conditional frames Ii−m:i are perturbed with diffusion noise at 50/1000 steps rather than kept clean, which improves robustness to imperfect conditioning. Letxi denote the feature representation at framei; the update rule within each transformer block is given as:xi =x i + (1 +αi 1)·Block  γi 1 ·LayerNorm(x i) +βi 1  . Likewise, training only on expert demonstrations from downstream tasks leaves the model unable to simulate failures, making the imagined trajectories unsuitable for training. Given a trajectoryτ = {I0:N }, we define a clip of lengthL as ci = Ii−L:i. The reward model, implemented as a VideoMAE [39] encoder with a linear head, is trained with binary cross-entropy loss. Given the aforementioned physical constraints, existing real-world RL methods often consider off-policy RL methods [8, 40–42]. However, off-policy methods naturally cause value estimation errors [43] and on-policy methods are often favorable for better performance. We adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) as the policy optimization algorithm, since it provides stable and scalable training in settings with sparse rewards. The overall training pipeline is detailed in Algorithm 1 in Appendix A. The baseline policy, trained only on expert demonstrations, has never observed collisions during training; it conti