REAL METHOD of "PPE: Positional Preservation Embedding for Token Compression in Multimodal Large Language Models" (arXiv 2510.22936v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Existing token merging methods reduce sequence length but fre- quently disrupt spatial layouts and temporal continuity by disregarding posi- tional relationships. In this work, we propose a novel encoding operator dubbed asPositionalPreservationEmbedding (PPE), which has the main hallmark of preservation of spatiotemporal structure during visual token compression. PPE is a parameter-free and generic operator that can be seamlessly integrated into existing token merging methods without any adjust- ments. A common paradigm involves encoding images or video frames into dense visual tokens, which are then fed into the language model for joint understanding. Despite the efficiency, existing compression methods often disrupt the spatial and temporal structure of visual inputs, limiting their applicability in layout-sensitive tasks such as counting, temporal grounding and sequential understanding. Figure 1 (b) illustrates the recent methods like PACT Dhouib et al. (2025) which have attempted to preserve layouts during compression, but still remain constrained by the insufficient and imprecise positions. In this work, we introducePositional Preservation Embedding(PPE), a novel positional encoding strategy which explicitly retains the different spatiotemporal layout into one compressed token. First, we aim to preserve spatial and temporal positions during similar token merging. To this end, PPE firstly assigns each visual token a positional ID (e.g., ∗Equal contribution. What is in the image? Position IDsPosition IDs Splited Position IDs MLLM ? Compression Figure 1:Comparison between PPE and other token merging methods of processing positional IDs. To simplify, the components such as the visual encoder are omitted.(a)ChatUniVi Jin et al. (2024) mainly assigns randomize ID value to the clustered visual tokens.(b)PACT Dhouib et al. This design is inspired by the observation that different layers capture increasingly abstract representations with higher similarity Bolya et al. Since PPE is decoupled from the merging algorithm and operates solely on position IDs, it naturally extends to multi-stage compression. This allows our method to preserve fine-grained spatiotemporal layouts across multiple compression stages, resulting in higher compression ratio, IDs retention (Section 4.4.5) and improved performance (Section 4.3). To our best knowledge, PPE is the first work that explores an effective and lightweight positional preservation solution during visual token compression of MLLM. In contrast to existing positional embedding methods that only preserves one position for single token and lead to the loss of de- tailed layouts, PPE enables each single token to represent multiple positions, thus preserving the vision layout more completely. Moreover, PPE is parameter-free and can be used in a plug-and-play fashion for easily implanting into existing visual token compression methods without any additional computational costs. The reported performances consistently outstrip previous compression methods Dhouib et al. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 • We identify a critical limitation in existing visual token merging methods—namely, the neglect of spatial structure preservation and temporal coherence—which leads to distortion of intra-frame layouts and disruption of inter-frame temporal relations. • We propose Positional Preservation Embedding (PPE), a novel, plug-and-play approach that explicitly preserves spatiotemporal integrity during token merging, effectively address- ing both spatial and temporal challenges. • We further show that PPE can be applied in cascade compression manner within multiple transformer layers of the MLLM, enabling substantial compression with minimal perfor- mance degradation. • We conduct extensive experiments across serveal image and video benchmarks, demon- strating that PPE maintains accuracy while reducing the visual token count by 90% and outperforms other visual token compression methods at comparable reduction ratios. These models typically align vision and language via cross-attention, projection modules, or lightweight multimodal transformers. In contrast, our method introduces a Positional Preservation Embedding that enables substantial token reduction while maintaining spa- tiotemporal coherence, offering a scalable alternative for multimodal reasoning. However, these methods often face challenges in visual token compression, as reduc- ing token counts can lead to the loss of crucial positional information. 3 METHODOLOGY In this section, we first recap the preliminaries of PPE, and then analyze why previous methods fail to hold the positional information. (2017) architecture by integrating relative posi- tional information directly into the self-attention mechanism. (2021), whereas earlier layers encode critical low- level semantics that are less amenable to aggressive compression. The training setting is mainly refer- ring to the public project Lee (2024), in which the gradient accumulation step is4, the learning rate is1e−5along with the warm-up ratio of0.03, while the learning rate of visual encoder and patch merger is2e−6and1e−5, respectively. Specifically, we conduct a layer-wise insertion study using the Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct model, which contains 36 transformer layers. Specifically, we insert PPE-based clustering modules at layers 11, 23, and 35, while keeping all other configurations unchanged. We randomly selected two samples and evaluated text–visual attention at the final LLM layer under a 55% token compression ratio. 4.4.2 INTEGRATION WITHOTHERCLUSTERING-BASEDMETHODS PPE is compatible with other clustering-based methods. Our method is decoupled from model size., extensive experiments are provided inAppendix A.4. 1) Chat-UniVi is a merging-based method that requires SFT, and performs bad in training-free setting especially on layout-sensitive benchmarks. 2) PACT and ToMe are fully training-free, and PPE is directly applied to the official pre-trained models without any additional training. Is your multi-modal model an all-around player? InEuropean Conference of Computer Vision,ECCV, 2024a. Method Short Medium LongAverageReduction Ratio Dense54.70 43.20 36.20 44.80 0% Chat-UniVi53.00 40.4035.8043.0796% PPE (Ours) 56.40 (+3.40)42.10(+7.70) 35.70 (-0.10)44.74(+1.67) 96% A.4 ANALYSIS OFMODELSIZE Our method is decoupled from model size. For the SFT setting, we trained it on only 1/5 of the data used for the 3B model due to time and reso