REAL METHOD of "Layerwise Federated Learning for Heterogeneous Quantum Clients using Quorus" (arXiv 2510.06228v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose a novel solution to this QFL problem,Quorus, that utilizes a layerwise loss function for effective training of varying-depth quan- tum models, which allows clients to choose models for high-fidelity output based on their individual capacity. Given the success of quantum ML, a natural consider- ation, like in classical ML, is to consider the real-world case of fragmented data across multiple private clients.How can clients with quantum computers train together, without revealing data to other parties?The classical analog of solving this problem has also been proposed, calledQuantum Federated Learning (QFL)(Chen & Yoo, 2021). All quan- tum computers are subject tohardware errorthat varies from computer to computer, which has con- tinued to be a critical challenge in quantum computing (Tannu & Qureshi, 2019; Montanez-Barrera et al., 2025). Reducing the depth of the circuit is particularly important, as a major source of quantum errors isdecoherence, where a qubit loses its important amplitude and phase information with respect to time (Schlosshauer, 2019; Zurek, 2003; Preskill, 2018).By keeping the circuit to a reasonably shallow depth, researchers attempt to utilize existing quantum computers to achieve practical quantum utility today. Unlike classical training, which can rely on inexpensive iterations, every quantum training step requires repeated circuit executions (shots) to estimate observables (McClean et al., 2016). As a result, algorithms must be designed to minimize the number of shots needed for accurate training to ascertain the economic viability for real-world QML. Quorus is the first-of-its-kind work that utilizes layerwise loss functions and knowledge distillation for synchronized objectives across heterogeneous-depth clients. We propose novel shot-efficient designs for varying quantum hardware capabilities and demonstrate both higher gradient magnitudes as well as implementations on all of IBM’s state-of-the-art superconducting quantum computers. • The first structured quantum federated learning framework (Quorus) that utilizes layerwise losses and reverse distillation for improved accuracy (to the best of our knowledge). Then,U(θ)is aparameterized quantum circuit(PQC) with trainable gate parameters, and the structure ofU(θ)is referred to as anansatz. These variational quantum circuits are often com- posed of repeated circuit structures calledlayers, and can be written asU(θ) =U 0:L(θ0:L) = UL(θL)UL−1(θL−1)...U0(θ0), whereU i is the parameterized circuit for layeri, with parametersθ i. For a particular outcomeb∈ {0,1}, if the first qubit in state|ψ⟩is measured to beb, then the resulting state is collapsed to|ψ b⟩= 1√ p(b) P k:k1=b βk |k⟩. This fundamental quantum property poses a unique challenge when the objectiveL j is defined for each layer, soL j =L(U 0:j;θ 0:j), whereU 0:j, θ0:j represents the layers and parameters up to layerj. The overall objective function in federated learning formclients isL(x1, x2, ..., xm) = 1 m Pm i=1 Li(xi), wherex j represents the data of clientjandL j is the loss function for client j(McMahan et al., 2023). Heterogeneous Federated Learningadds a layer of complexity to FL by allowing for clients to have different local model architectures (Diao et al., 2021). Because the parameter spaces of models are now different, special considerations need to be made as the differing model architectures lead toparameter mismatches that can negatively affect training (Kim et al., 2023). Since this original work, some newer techniques have been proposed, namely FEDepth and ScaleFL (Zhang et al., 2025; Ilhan et al., 2023), which assume that intermediate layers can be trained; however, this is not applicable to PQC’s as training these layers requires a client to run circuits to that depth, which precisely is the bottleneck in quantum circuits. The classical work most closely related to Quorus, DepthFL (Kim et al., 2023), is amenable to the setup of quantum clients with models of varying depths as it is a layerwise FL technique; however, evaluating the layerwise loss function on quantum computers is nontrivial due to measurement collapse, which we discuss further in Sec. Clients then continue to train locally, repeating the process for a set number of rounds. The layerwise loss function for clientkis Lk = Pdk i=1 Li ce + 1 dk−1 Pdk i=1 Pdk j=1, j̸=iDKL(pj ∥p i),(1) whereL i ce is the Binary Cross Entropy loss for the classifier at depthi. Note, then, that this loss function assumes that there is a means to extract classifier outputs at each layer – an important problem with a unique quantum design (addressed in Sec. In our setup for Quorus, the lossL i ce is computed via the probability of measuring a qubit to be 0 or 1 for our binary classification tasks. Input Features Layer 1 Layer 2 Copy State Classifier Output (a) Classical Classifier Input Features Layer 1 Layer 2 Partial State Collapse Classifier Output (b) Quantum Classifier Figure 3: The second is theV-shapedansatz, which has a staircase of CNOTs going down from the first to the last qubit, which then go back up to the first qubit, and the third is an alternating combination of the two. 4.3 QUANTUMCLASSIFIERDESIGN When one attempts to implement the layerwise loss func- tion in Eq. sure the qubit, then how can we pass on the same state to the next layer? An illustration of this dilemma is in Fig. 3(a), the data after the first layer is somehow converted to a scalar, and implicitly, the data is passed, unchanged, to the next layer (and this “copy” operation has minimal classical overhead). Passing the state unchanged thus requires you to prepare another copy of it, which induces additional shot overhead that is linear in the number of layers and is a nontrivial cost, given the expense of running quantum computers. one ancilla qubit for each of the L layers 0Ancillae 0 + Figure 5: The circuit is only run once, but requires an ancilla qubit per layer, and also de- phases the first qubit. For the first layer, the statistics match the Layer- wise model; for later layers, they differ because entangling the first qubit with an ancilla “dephases” it (Gyawali et al., 2024). Funnel.Finally, for clients that may not have a high-shot budget, no ancillas, and no midcircuit measurement capability, we design a model that layer-by-layer drops operations that act 6 Table 2: Capacity Technique MNIST Fashion-MNIST 0/1 3/4 4/9 Trouser/Boot Bag/Sandal Pullover/Coat 2L Q-HeteroFL90.3±5.2(↓7.9)58.8±12.6(↓