REAL METHOD of "Rodrigues Network for Learning Robot Actions" (arXiv 2506.02618v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce theNeural Rodrigues Operator, a learnable extension of the classical Rodrigues’ Rotation Formula from robot control, where the original coefficients are replaced with trainable weights and joint angles are generalized to abstract features. To this end, we propose theNeural Rodrigues Operator, a learnable generalization of the classical forward kinematics operation, designed to inject kinematics-aware inductive bias into neural computation. Building on this operator, we design the Rodrigues Network (RodriNet), a novel neural architecture specialized for pro- cessing actions. a Rodrigues Layer for passing information from joints to links, built up our neural operator; a Joint Layer for passing information from links to joints; and finally, a Self-Attention Layer for global information exchange. 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Transformer-based architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) are widely used in policy learning (Brohan et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Shridhar et al., 2023), and recent work has explored incorporating structural bias via graph-aware positional embeddings (Hong et al., 2021) or masked attention (Sfer- razza et al., 2024). We instead use standard self-attention layers for network capacity, but rely on our kinematics-inspired operator for inductive bias. Prior methods have inserted analytical forward kinematics as a differentiable layer in neural networks (Villegas et al., 2018) to help them reason about the Cartesian results of the robot action. Other methods apply Cartesian-space loss functions after computing forward kinematics on network outputs (Pavllo et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020), but these approaches do not alter the network architecture and are thus orthogonal to our focus. In con- trast, our method derive a learnable operator from forward kinematics, thereby making the network kinematics-aware while maintaining the flexibility to learn high-level features. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 RodriguesΘ𝐹 𝐹Θ𝐹Rodrigues Θ𝐹 𝐹Θ𝐹 LayerNorm LayerNorm LayerNorm Θ𝐹 𝐹Θ𝐹 Linear Linear Multi-HeadAttention 𝐺 Θ𝐹 𝐹Θ𝐹 𝐺𝐺𝐺 Rodrigues Layerupdate link featureJoint Layerupdate joint featureSelf-attention Layerexchange link feature Figure 2:Rodrigues Block.It comprises three components: a Rodrigues Layer for passing infor- mation from joints to links, constructed with our Multi-Channel Neural Rodrigues Operator; a Joint Layer for passing information from links to joints; and a Self-Attention Layer for global information exchange with all the links and the global token. (1) a Rodrigues Layer for passing information from joints to links, constructed with our Multi-Channel Neural Rodrigues Operator (Section 4.1); (2) a Joint Layer for passing information from links to joints (Section 4.2); (3) and a Self-Attention Layer (Section 4.3) for global information exchange. 4.1 RODRIGUESLAYER With the Multi-Channel Rodrigues Operator being the core component operating on a single joint, we construct theRodrigues Layer, which extends this operator to the full tree structure of an ar- ticulated robot. The Rodrigues Layer maintains a set of Rodrigues Kernels{W ∗ j }D j=1, one for each joint, and computes the output link features{F out l } from the input link features{F in l }and joint features{Θ in j }. 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 4.3 OTHER COMPONENTS AND OVERALL ARCHITECTURE Self-attention layerWhile the Rodrigues Layer and Joint Layer leverage the spatial locality inher- ent in articulated structures, they restrict information flow to consecutive links and joints. It sequentially applies the Rodrigues Layer, Joint Layer, and Self-attention Layer to produce updated link features, joint features, and a global token, where each layer’s outputs serves as the next layer’s inputs. As shown in Table 1, the Rodrigues Network achieves the lowest training loss and test errors when trained on a pre-collected dataset of10 5 trajectories. 103 104 105 106 Trainset size 10 5 10 4 10 3 Test MSE Test error vs trainset size MLP GCN BoT Transformer Rodrigues (b) Testset performance (MSE↓) under different amounts of training data. Our method replaces these with the Rodrigues Network, which takes the current observation, denoising timestep, and a noisy action as inputs and predicts the corresponding action noise. Additionally, we introduce a cross-attention layer following the self-attention layer to enable inter- actions between joint and link features and the input image tokens. Section C outlines our experimental settings, including data collection, training procedures, evaluation protocols, and all training hyperparameters. We first apply a ViT encoder to transform the image into visual tokens, then insert a cross-attention layer into each Rodrigues Block so that link features and the global token can attend to these tokens. Training detailsWe use the Adam optimizer with lr= 0.0003and without weight decay and train each model for 10,000 steps. In each training step, we generate a new batch of 1024 input- output pairs using the same method as for the validation and test sets, instead of sampling from a fixed-size training set. Training detailsWe use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001 and no weight decay, and train each model for 10,000 steps. Parameter name Value Parameter name Value Parameter Value Optimizer AdamW Learning rate0.0001Weight decay 1e-6 LR scheduler Cosine scheduler Batch size 1024 Episode steps 200 Table 7:Demo trajectories and training iterations for each task in imitation learning experi- ment. Parameter Value Parameter Value Parameter Value Training iterations 1,000,000 Optimizer AdamW Learning rate 1e-5 Batch size 64 Validate every 1,000 iterations Weight decay 1e-4 D METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS D.1 FORWARD KINEMATICS FITTING We construct four baseline methods using existing neural network backbones for comparison: No Joint Layers, Self-Attention Layers, or Global Tokens are used. 18 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Compute resourcesWe train each model on a single Quadro RTX 6000 graphics card, and the approximate training time for 100,000 training iterations are listed in Table 9. Table 9:Approximate training time of different methods for fitting forward kinematics Method MLP GCN Transformer BoT Rodrigues (ours) Time 17min 1h 50min 2h 20min 2h 20min 1h 18min D.2 MOTION PREDICTION INCARTESIAN SPACE This experiment uses the same four neural backbones as in the forward kinemat