REAL METHOD of "Bridging Input Feature Spaces Towards Graph Foundation Models" (arXiv 2605.04834v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we propose ALL-IN, a simple and theoretically grounded method that enables transferability across datasets with different input features. Empirically, ALL-INachieves strong performance across diverse node- and graph-level tasks on unseen datasets with new input features, without requiring architecture changes or retraining. Our method first projects potentially disparate node features into a common, high-dimensional space using a stochastic projection matrix. Instead of directly processing raw node features in downstream layers, ALL-INutilizes the computed stochastic node-covariance matrix (and its higher-order variants), as shown in Figure 1, as a graph operator within a graph neural network (GNN). (a) The computed operators and, critically, the resulting node representations throughout the GNN are invariant in distribution to arbitrary permutations of the original input features; (b) The expected operator is invariant to general orthogonal transformations (basis changes) of the input features; (c) The overall method is inherently insensitive to dimensional mismatches across datasets. Other works align feature spaces through projections (Xia & Huang, 2024; Yu et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024a; Fang et al., 2023) and multi-domain feature or structure aligners with 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 /gid00049/gid00081/gid00078/gid00073/gid00068/gid00066/gid00083 Figure 2:The ALL-INArchitecture.Input node features X are first randomly projected into R(0). 3 METHOD Our method, ALL-IN, replaces dataset-specific raw node features with covariance-based operators that are better suited for generalization across input feature spaces. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Random Feature Projections.Given a graph with n nodes and node feature matrix X∈R n×d, where the input dimension d may vary across graph datasets, we first apply a random linear trans- formation to project the features into a unified fixed-dimensional space h that is shared across datasets: This step is key to ensuring that our approach is invariant (in distribution) to feature permutations, as we discuss in Section 4. Then, we compute the covariance matrix on these propagated, centered featuresR (p) c =Π cR(p): H (ℓ) = M O∈O GNNLayer(ℓ,O)(H (ℓ−1),O),(6) 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 where GNNLayer(ℓ,O) is the GNN layer associated with operator O∈ O in layer ℓ, taking as input H (ℓ−1) and performing message passing using O as the operator, using learnable weights W (ℓ,O) ∈R h(ℓ−1)×h(ℓ) andh (0) =h+h s. Then, we aggregate these projected edge features at the node level (e.g., by averaging features of incoming edges for each node) to obtain node-level representations R(0) edge derived from edges. We then compute node-covariance matrices K(p) edge based on these aggregated (and potentially propagated) features, similar to Equation (3). Building on these properties, we validate the stochastic training procedure using Jensen’s inequality under standard convexity assumptions (Section 4.2). That is, if ¯Kis the set of operators computed usingXPinstead ofX, thenK d = ¯K. Training with node-covariance operators NodeCov(R(0)) derived from these stochastic projections offers advantages over relying on a single, deterministically computed covariance oper- ator, such as NodeCov(X). Then, the expected Node Covariance computed from the stochastically projected features is invariant to the orthogonal transformationQ: 4.2 TRAININGOBJECTIVEUPPERBOUND ALL-INcomputes the feature projection R(0) and node-covariance operator K(0) =NodeCov(XC) using a stochastic projection matrix C sampled in each forward pass. We now validate this prac- tical training approach by showing its connection to performance on the stable, expected final representationE C[H (L)], assuming common convexity conditions for the final prediction layer. Performance of ALL-INon pre-training datasets compared to ALL-IN-SPECIALIZEDwhich is trained separately on each individual dataset. Let ϕ:R n×h(L) →R n×t be the final prediction layer, and let L(·,Y) be the loss function comparing predictions to ground truth labels Y . Then, our stochastic optimization objective provides an upper bound for the loss of the expected representation: L(ϕ(EC[H (L)]),Y)| {z } Loss of Expected Representation ≤E C[L(ϕ(H (L)),Y)]| {z } Expected Loss (Training Objective) (8) where the expectationE C[·]is taken over the random projection matrixC. Equation (8) establishes that the expected loss minimized during training (RHS) serves as an upper bound for the loss evaluated on the stable, expected final representation (LHS). Thus, minimizing the empirical average loss (approximating the RHS) acts as a theoretically sound surrogate objective, implicitly minimizing the loss associated with the expected representation, validating our stochastic approach. 5.1 PERFORMANCE ONPRE-TRAININGSOURCEDATASETS(A1) In this subsection, we assess the ability of ALL-INto learn from a wide array of source datasets simul- taneously, without significant performance degradation on the individual datasets it was pre-trained on. For each dataset-task pair, a dedicated prediction head is attached 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 to the shared ALL-INcomponent and trained to predict the corresponding target. Inductive Step (Layerℓ).The hidden representations at layerℓare computed as: Then, our stochastic optimization objective provides an upper bound for the loss of the expected representation: L(ϕ(EC[H (L)]),Y)| {z } Loss of Expected Representation ≤E C[L(ϕ(H (L)),Y)]| {z } Expected Loss (Training Objective) (8) where the expectationE C[·]is taken over the random projection matrixC. Performance of ALL-INon pre-training source datasets compared to specialized supervised baselines trained individually per dataset (including our ALL-IN-SPECIALIZEDwhich is trained separately on each individual dataset). C.2 COMPARISON TOMETHODSTRAINED ON EACHINDIVIDUALDATASET In this section, we compare the performance of ALL-INto that of standard supervised GNN baselines (GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), GAT (Veli ˇckovi´c et al., 2018), GIN (Xu et al., 2019)), trained individually for each dataset, using their original, dataset-specific input features. The goal for ALL-INhere is therefore to show that its jointly pre-trained shared encoder can support task-specific heads that remain competitive against individually trained models, indicating its ability to learn general-purpose represent