REAL METHOD of "Difference-Aware Retrieval Polices for Imitation Learning" (arXiv 2606.09758v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We show that reusing the training data during inference via a semi-parametric retrieval-based imitation learning approach can alleviate this challenge. We presentDifference-AwareRetrievalPolicies for Imitation Learning (DARP), a semi-parametric retrieval-based imitation learning approach that addresses this limitation by reparameterizing the imitation learning problem in terms of local neighborhood structure rather than direct state-to-action mappings. 1 INTRODUCTION , , , , , , Imitation Learning Difference-Aware Retrieval Policies … Figure 1:Overview of DARP:Unlike standard BC (left), DARP (right) utilizes a retrieval-based reparameteri- zation centered around difference vectors between query states and retrieved neighbors. In standard behavior cloning, the dataset of expert state-action pairs is used only for training and is discarded at inference-time, while DARP utilizes it to perform retrieval to find a local neighborhood of expert state-action pairs around each query points q. “Local” methods (Pari et al., 2022; Mansimov & Cho, 2018; Salzberg & Aha, 1994) instead adapt predictions to the structure of the dataset itself, consulting neighborhoods of similar states and generating outputs from non-parametric or semi-parametric operations on the training distribution of expert behavior. We introduceDifference-AwareRetrievalPolicies for Imitation Learning (DARP), which combines the robustness of local methods with the stability of regularized global policy learning. 1) first retrieves a set of k neighbors from the training corpus and then predicts k actions conditioned on tuples of (neighbor state, associated action, and difference from the query state). This design both grounds predictions in observed data (due to non-parametric retrieval) and implicitly enforces local consistency (due to parametric action prediction, conditional on the retrieved neighbors). We perform a careful set of ablations to highlight the importance of our particular choice of representation and architecture, providing general-purpose insights into retrieval-based algorithms for sequential decision-making problems. 2 DIFFERENCE-AWARERETRIEVALPOLICIES FORIMITATIONLEARNING In this work, we instantiate a new class of imitation learning methods that get the best of both “global” parametric learning methods and “local” learning methods. We propose a new architecture and simple training objective that allows for learning under the same requirements as typical behavior cloning, while providing significant improvements both theoretically and empirically. In Section 2.3, we then show how the benefits of explicitly regularized learning can be implicitly accomplished by modifying policyarchitecturerather than the objective. Finally, in Section 2.4 we introduce our practical algorithm DARP, which realizes these benefits through a semi-parametric retrieval augmented architecture that can be generally applied to imitation learning with modern neural networks and generative modeling tools. NEIGHBORMANIFOLDREGULARIZEDIMITATIONLEARNING While behavior cloning minimizes only the supervised imitation loss over expert states drawn from D ∗, such an objective alone does not control how the policy behaves on states that deviate from the manifold of expert states. This intuition leads to the following neighborhood-regularized loss (LMRIL), where the standard imitation learning objective (LBC) is combined with an additional smoothness penalty (LS) enforcing predictions to respect the geometry of the dataset rather than relying solely on pointwise supervision. 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2.3 IMPLICITMANIFOLDREGULARIZATION VIAIN-CONTEXTARCHITECTURES While our MRIL objective does amortize local learning to provide improvements over vanilla BC, there are two notable drawbacks. Second, the requirement to optimize a modified, regularized objective rather than a standard BC objective may modify the optimization landscape in adverse ways. 1), by modifying the policy architecture rather than modifying the objective? In this section, we introduce a retrieval-based change in policy architecture that leads to animplicit manifold regularization effect (iMRIL), despite using a standard imitation objective. With iMRIL, we can obtain the benefits of Laplacian smoothing (from MRIL) by training on a standard BC objective (as shown in Fig. We then build on this algorithm to develop a practical instantiation of this method (DARP) in Section 2.4. iMRIL architecture:The high-level idea be- hind iMRIL is simple – we propose moving the neighborhood aggregation (averaging) op- eration from the objective (as in Eq. So instead of learning a stan- dard feedforward predictor f(s) that is trained against a neighborhood regularized smoothness objective (Eq. 1), we propose embedding the structure of neighborhood aggregation directly into the parameterization of the action predic- tor ˆf itself, while maintaining the objective as standard imitation learning. Intuitively, we are parameterizing the action predictor ˆf as an aggregation of predictions at neighbor states from the training data f(s ∗ i ), and then learning f . 6 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 At training time, this can be used to define a straightforward imitation learning objective from the expert datasetD ∗: Rather than adding an explicit regularization term (and its attendant hyperparameter λ) into our loss function, we show that we can induce smoothing implicitly by building neighborhood aggregation into the policy architecture itself (Theorem 2). This is trained only with the standard imitation learning objective. (1) R&P (Sridhar et al., 2025):refers to directly taking the action corresponding to the nearest neighbor, (2)LWR (Pari et al., 2022):refers to performing locally weighted regression on retrieved neighbors, (3)BC:refers to standard parametric behavior cloning, (4)REGENT (Sridhar et al., 2025):refers to a transformer-based in-context learning method conditioned on retrieved neighbors, (5)MRIL: We observe that purely non-parametric methods (R&P and LWR) perform poorly on these tasks, and while MRIL is nearly always able to get a score higher than vanilla BC, the highest scores on this suite of tasks are always achieved by our DARP architecture. We define τs and τ∆ as the 1st percentile of likelihoods of the training set (that is, 1% of the deltas seen at training time are less likely than τ∆). 10 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 4 RELATEDWO