REAL METHOD of "SPG: Sandwiched Policy Gradient for Masked Diffusion Language Models" (arXiv 2510.09541v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To circumvent this, recent works (Zhao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2025) adapt standard RL and preference optimizationalgorithms,suchasGRPO(Shaoetal.,2024)andDPO(Rafailovetal.,2023),byusing theELBO oraone-step estimationas asurrogatefor thetruelikelihood. (2025) employs a trajectory-level policy update algorithm together with a decoding order predictionmodule,jointlyoptimizingbothmodelpredictionsandtheorderofunmasking. To address these limitations, we propose Sandwiched Policy Gradient (SPG), a novel reinforcement learningalgorithmfordiffusionlanguagemodelsthatcomputesamorerobustandlessbiasedpolicy gradient. •A block-wise masking technique that improves the stability of the training objective’s estimation. •State-of-the-art results among RL algorithms for diffusion language models on four reasoning benchmarks and two coding benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. LELBO(x;θ) =E t,zt  nX i=1 w(t)·1(z t,i =m)·logπ θ(xi |z t)  ,(2) wherew(t) =α ′ t/(αt −1)is a time-dependent loss weight, and the expectation is over a random timestept∼ U[0,1]and the corrupted sequencez t ∼q t|0(· |x). In essence, this objective trains the model to “fill in the blanks” by predicting the original tokens at masked positions. This objective is commonly optimized using policy gradient methods, which rely on the following gradient estimator. To overcome this,priorwork(Zhuetal.,2025;Yangetal.,2025)approximatesthistermusingitsELBO,effectively replacinglogπ θ(x|c)with a score derived from the pre-training objective in Equation (2). This constraintprevents the model from effectively learning from negative feedback (i.e., penalizing bad outputs) and is incompatible with advanced RL algorithms that use relative or negative rewards (Shao et al., 2024), biasing the final policy. 1:Initializeπ θ ←π 0 2:whilenot convergeddo 3:Sample a promptc∼ D, thengcompletions{x j ∼π θ(· |c)}g j=1 4:∀j∈[g], compute rewardR(c,x j)and advantageA j(xj,c) 5:forgradient update iterations{1, . 9:Perform gradient update:θ←θ+ϵ∇J SPG(θ) 10:returnπ θ 3 Sandwiched Policy Gradient with Evidence Bounds WeintroduceSPG,anovelpolicygradientalgorithmdesignedformaskeddiffusionlanguagemodels (Algorithm 1). Our method aims to address a critical issue in applying reinforcement learning to dLLMsbycreatingavalidoptimizationobjectivebasedontractableboundsofthemodel’sevidence. 3.1 A Lower Bound Objective for Policy Optimization Our approach is based on group relative policy optimization (Shao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025b). We then compute the advantageAj(c,x j) :=R(c,x j)− 1 g Pg ȷ=1 R(c,x ȷ). Moreover, we transform the conventional policy optimization objective as an advantage-weighted log-likelihood objective, for reasons that will be clear later: Then, the gradient of mixture objective (8) is given by gω,k = ((1−ω)w(t,z t) +ωρ β)∂ θk logπ θ(x|z t,c).(9) IfVar((ρ β −w(t,z t))∂θk logπ θ(x|z t,c))>0, thenVar[g ω,k]is a strictly convex quadratic inω and thus admits a unique minimizerω⋆ k. These values can also be adaptively adjusted during training to better match the evolving training dynamics and data distribution. For Sudoku, to avoid train-test leakage, we take the training set fromD1 andsplitthedatabySudokuanswers,ensuringthatthetestsetcontainsentirelynewpuzzlesolutions. Baselines.We compare our method with several recent RL algorithms for dLLMs, including D1(Zhao et al., 2025),WD1(Tang et al., 2025), and UniGRPO (Yang et al., 2025). RewarddynamicsthroughouttrainingareillustratedinFigure3,whereSPGshowsarapidandsteady increase in reward over the optimization steps, further demonstrating its efficiency and robustness. Ablations on Algorithm Components.We first study the impact of different log-likelihood es- timation methods for negative advantage traces in Table 3. Specifically, we compare our approach using ˜LEUBOor ˜LMixwiththoseusingL ELBO(SPGw/ELBO)oromittingthenegativeadvantageloss entirely (SPG wo/ neg). Removing the negative advantage loss results in a substantial performance drop,highlightingtheimportanceofnegativeadvantagepenaltiestoRL.Additionally,bothMixture and EUBO methods outperform ELBO (except for EUBO in MATH500), showcasing the benefits of evidence upper bound regularization for negative rewards. 5 Conclusion We propose SPG, a novel reinforcement learning algorithm for diffusion large language models. Recently, large-scale diffusion language models trained with masked diffusion objectives have demonstrated performance competitive with similarly sized autoregressive models (Nie et al., 2025; Gong et al., 2024). Algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) constrain policy updates to a trust region, reducing variance and promoting stable learning by preventing excessive shifts from the reference policy (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017). Recent works (Liu et al., 2025b; Zheng et al., 2025; Team et al., 2025; Cohen et al., 2025) further improve RL algorithms for LLMs by reducing the bias introduced by the GRPO objective, enhancing sample efficiency, and introducing additional regularization. ReinforcementLearningforDiffusionLanguageModels.NumerousstudieshaveexploredRL- basedfine-tuningalgorithmsfordiffusionmodelswithcontinuousobjectives(Fanetal.,2023;Black et al., 2023; Clark et al., 2023). Alternatively, methods likeD1(Zhao et al., 2025) and UniGRPOYangetal.(2025)utilizetheGRPOframework,approximatingthelog-likelihoodthrough eitheraone-stepunmasking(asinD1)orMonteCarloestimationusingtheELBO(asinUniGRPO). LLaDOU(Huang et al., 2025) decomposes the likelihood along the diffusion steps and utilizes a trajectory-level policy update algorithm for fine-tuning, while such stepwise approach is computationally costly. The main distinctions among these methods are highlighted in Table 5, covering aspects such as the policy update algorithm, log-likelihood estimationtechnique, maskingstrategyusedinlikelihoodestimation, andotheruniquecomponents. It takes the DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) algorithm and uses ELBO with random masking to estimate the likelihood terms in the DPO objective. D1(Zhao et al., 2025) and UniGRPO (Yang et al., 2025) employs the GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) objective.D1uses the one-step prediction to estimate each likelihood term in the GRPO objective, 17 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 which predicts the the clean response sequence based on the partially masked prompt and the fully masked response. Then it lever