REAL METHOD of "Are Reasoning LLMs Robust to Interventions on their Chain-of-Thought?" (arXiv 2602.07470v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

But how robust are these reasoning traces to disruptions that occurwithinthem? To address this question, we introduce a controlled eval- uation framework that perturbs a model’s own CoT at fixed timesteps. We design seven interventions (benign, neutral, and adversarial) and apply them to multiple open-weight RLLMs across MATH, SCIENCE, and LOGICtasks. These findings provide new evidence on how RLLMs maintain reasoning integrity, identify doubt as a central recovery mechanism, and highlight trade-offs between robustness and efficiency that future training methods should address. These Reasoning-LLMs (RLLMs) are trained to solve problems using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, which breaks down solutions into intermediate steps (Jie et al., 2024; Paul et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2025c). Therefore, we introduce a controlled framework to probe robustnessduringreasoning. Starting from correct CoTs produced by several RLLMs, we intervene at fixed timesteps by modifying only the current reasoning step. (1) We introduce a controlled benchmark that perturbs a model’s ownchain of thought at fixed timesteps to test robustness during reasoning; (2) we design seven inter- 1 arXiv:2602.07470v1 [cs.AI] 7 Feb 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Math/Science/ Logic Datasets Suppose that $g(x) = 5x - 3$. What is $g^{-1}(g^{-1}(14))$? How many two-digit positive integers are congruent to 1 (mod 5)? Find the sum of the first six terms of an arithmetic sequence in which the sum of any number of terms is equal to four times the square of that number. … Okay, so I need to figure out how many times the digit 7 appears in the numbers… First, let's think about the numbers from 1 to 2017. … Therefore, I think the answer is 602 Okay, so I need to figure out how many times the digit 7 appears in the numbers… First, let's think about the numbers from 1 to 2017. … Therefore, I think the answer is 602 Okay, so I need to figure out how many times the digit 7 appears in the numbers… First, let's think about the numbers from 1 to 2017. … First, let me recall what an arithmetic sequence is… The sum of the first 'n' terms of an arithmetic sequence is given by… … Therefore, the first six terms are 4, 12, 20, 28, 36, 44. ● Add misleading step ● Hallucinated step ● Start unrelated CoT Okay, so I need to figure out how many times the digit 7 appears in the numbers… First, let's think about the numbers from 1 to 2017. … Therefore, I think the answer is 602 Okay, so I need to find the sum of the first six terms of an arithmetic sequence … The sum of the first 'n' terms of an arithmetic sequence is given by… … Therefore, the first six terms are 4, 12, 20, 28, 36, 44. Then, we segment the CoTs into reasoning steps and perform various interventions at fixed timesteps in the reasoning chains. They reveal concrete trade-offs between robustness and test-time compute, highlight that stylistic shifts, and not just semantic errors, can impair recovery, and point to actionable training targets: 2 RELATEDWORK ONRLLMS ANDLLM SELF-CORRECTION Reasoning LLMs.While the concept of CoT prompting emerged early (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023), we define RLLMs as LLMs that are post-trained to natively support reasoning. In this study, we define RLLMs as LLMs that are either trained directly with online RL to output long-form CoTs or are distilled from another LLM trained using online RL, such as models distilled from DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025). However, RL-based methods show promise:ScoRe(Kumar et al., 2025b) trains 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 multi-turn second-attempt corrections, improving reasoning tasks, whileS 2R(Ma et al., 2025) uses combined rewards to verify and self-correct, boosting math reasoning accuracy with limited data. (2025) use similar interventions to measure when in the pretraining process this self-reflection skill is first observed. Our methods establish a new standard for benchmarking reasoning robustness and will inform future improvements in LLM training. Dyck Languages, Logical Deduction, Multistep Arithmetic, Tracking Shuffled Ob- jects, and Word Sorting, where the model must identify the location of the first incorrect reasoning step. Hmm, let me break this down step by step. We define the timestept i of stepR i as the fraction of cumulative character length up toR i relative to the full chain length: ti = 1 Z iX j=1 |Rj|,whereZ= nX j=1 |Rj|(1) We set target timestepsT= 0.1,0.3,0.5,0.7,0.9and align each to the nearest reasoning step. At timestept, the chain includes all steps up toR k where|t i −t|is minimized. Applying interventions.At each selected timestep, we modify the reasoning trace up toR k and remove subsequent steps. For each problem, we apply 7 intervention types at 5 timesteps, yielding7×5 = 35variants of interventions per reasoning chain. For theCon- tinuationintervention, where we insert a correct reasoning step from a different model, the RLLM recognizes the unfamiliar content by outputting ”Wait”, but then proceeds correctly after realizing the information is accurate. Finally, when an unrelated CoT is introduced, the RLLM follows it for a few steps, then recognizes its irrelevance and recovers. We use the LOGICdataset at timestept= 0.3with the “Wrong Continuation” intervention, evaluating all 326 problems×8 samples per problem for each intervention count. Here, we gain insights into how RLLMs respond to interventions, and we take first steps towards a more detailed understanding of how RLLMs realize that there is misleading information or errors in the reasoning chain that need to be corrected. C ACTIVATION ANALYSIS We record the pre-attention residual stream activations of the final token at each layer, denoted r(l) :=h (l) n ∈R d, wherenis the sequence length. At layerlthe vector is transformed by multi-head self-attention and by an MLP: We then pre-fill the sequence, record the residual activations, and train linear classifiers on top of a training set of0.8×1200 = 960acti- vation embeddings for each layer and intervention type. The classifier accuracies significantly increase immediately after the first attention layer, and then remain consistently accurate, with slight increases in later layers for larger models. Linear probe accuracies for residual stream activations on different interventions by layer phrasing reasoningis significantly higher, reaching0.996in later layers of the model. Rewrite the provided reasoning trace in d