REAL METHOD of "RL of Thoughts: Navigating LLM Reasoning with Inference-time Reinforcement Learning" (arXiv 2505.14140v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To improve this, we proposeRL-of-Thoughts (RLoT), where we train a lightweight navigator model with reinforcement learning (RL) to generate task-adaptive logical struc- tures at inference time, enhancing LLM reasoning. First, reasoning tasks span various domains, including mathematics, STEM, commonsense, etc., where 1 arXiv:2505.14140v3 [cs.AI] 27 Jan 2026 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 tasks in each domain exhibit diverse characteristics, making it infeasible to manually design logical structures specified for each task. Second, complex reasoning tasks often require multiple steps, where the problem-solving status evolves after each step, requiring dynamic adjustments to the logical structure for subsequent reasoning. • We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of our method to improve LLM reasoning across various tasks. • We demonstrate the transferability and efficiency of our method, where the trained navigator model can transfer across various LLMs and reasoning tasks. 2 PRELIMINARIES 2.1 LARGELANGUAGEMODELS(LLMS) Large language models (LLMs) are a class of advanced neural networks characterized by parameter scales up to billions, primarily trained through next-token prediction objectives. The agent’s objective in an MDP is to maximize the total accumulated reward over time, which is the sum of the discounted rewards obtained at each step. Refine Reason one step In this step, we calculate... Debate Refine Terminate Basic logic blocks (action space) Navigator Action space Legend Prompt LLM response Train & Inference Train only PRM response Trained module Frozen module Figure 1: We train an RL agent as the navigator, which dynamically selects and combines basic logic blocks along the reasoning process, constructing task-specific logical structures for each task and thereby enhancing the LLMs’ ability to handle complex reasoning tasks. Specifically, we first model long-sequence reasoning as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where we design the action space, state space, and state transition mechanism, making the sequence of decisions within an episode correspond to the generation of a logical structure for reasoning (Section 3.2). Correctness of calculation For each detailed aspect, we require the LLM to assign a score from 1 to 3, which is then aggregated to form the state of the MDP. Then, we prompt the LLM to reason one step further based on the selected plan. Second, the “Refine” action is automatically converted to “Reason one step” when it appears as the first action, as no refinement to the original problem is needed. 3.3 TRAINING OF THENAVIGATORMODEL Within the MDP framework outlined above, given a specific LLM type and a kind of reasoning task, we train the navigator model. Consequently, our framework is algorithm-agnostic, allowing for the employment of arbitrary off-the-shelf RL algorithms for training. Then, we use these problems for training the navigator model, from which we randomly select one in each episode and repeat it multiple times. After training, the PRM model is no longer required, and the trained navigator model is used directly. Given an intermediate reasoning state, the navigator selects an action, which is then used to prompt the LLM to continue reasoning using the logical structure associated with the selected action. For Zero-shot CoT, we employ prompts with “Let’s think step by step”, and for Few-shot CoT, we include specific few-shot examples for each benchmark in the prompts as outlined in prior work (Yang et al., 2024b; Fu et al., 2023; Rein et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022). Following the original settings, we perform majority voting across four reasoning samples in CoT-SC, and we implement a logical tree with two layers and five nodes per layer in ToT. 4.2 TRAININGDETAILS In our implementation, the navigator model is a simple three-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) with the Dueling Network architecture (Wang et al., 2016). By integrating Double Q-learning to mitigate value overestimation and the Dueling architecture to separate state and advantage representations, this algorithm significantly improves stability during the training process. Furthermore, in Appendix A.2, we investigate the impact of employing alternative RL algorithms and extending training episodes, where the results consistently demonstrate similar convergence. The results show that our method performs well, consistently outperforming the established inference- time baselines across almost all reasoning tasks when combined with various LLMs. By directly generate specific logical structures for each question without requiring search-and-trial, our method reached the best performance while maintain a low cost. Method Train Test Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct @MATH Llama3.1-8B-Instruct @MATH GPT-4o-mini @MATH RLoT (ours) Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct@MATH 80.38 56.56 77.36 Llama3.1-8B-Instruct@MATH 81.48 53.60 78.14 GPT-4o-mini@MATH 80.84 56.94 78.08 CoT-SC – 80.04 51.74 76.84 Transfer across Different Reasoning Tasks.To verify the transferability of RLoT across different reasoning tasks, we respectively train navigator models with Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct on three different benchmarks, namely MATH, GPQA, and StrategyQA. Method Train Test Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct @MATH Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct @GPQA Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct @StrategyQA RLoT (ours) Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct@MATH 80.38 51.34 81.22 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct@GPQA 80.76 53.57 80.64 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct@StrategyQA 79.94 50.22 81.37 CoT-SC – 80.04 45.54 80.06 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 5: Task MATH GPQA StrategyQA Instance number 5000 448 687 Major 2-step pattern Reason-Refine Reason-Refine Reason-Debate Reason-Decompose Reason-Debate Reason-Refine Major 3-step pattern Decompose-Refine-Reason Reason-Refine-Debate Reason-Decompose-Debate Reason-Refine-Debate Reason-Decompose-Refine Reason-Refine-Debate 4.6 TYPICALREASONINGPATTERNS The experimental results above have demonstrated RLoT’s capability to enhance LLM reasoning with task-specific logical structures. In contrast, the proposed RLoT method employs RL to train a navigator agent. In this paper, the proposed RLoT method applies RL at inference time, leveraging the power of RL to train a lightweight navigator rather than the entire parameters of LLMs, our method achieves low cost and wide compatibility with various pre-trained LLMs. 6 CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we propose RL-of-Thoughts (RLoT), an inference-time technique that utilizes RL to train a navi