REAL METHOD of "RAEE: A Robust Retrieval-Augmented Early Exit Framework for Efficient Inference" (arXiv 2405.15198v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Current methods typically train internal classifiers or use heuristic methods to determine the exit layer. However, those methods either introduce significant training overheads or lead to performance degradation. To address these limitations, this paper proposes RAEE, a robust Retrieval-AugmentedEarlyExit framework that not only enables early exit but also enhances model performance through corrective exit information at inter- mediate layers. Subse- quently, this paper introduces the process of collecting exit information of correct predictions and the steps to construct the retrieval database. Finally, leveraging the pre-constructed retrieval database, RAEE utilizes the exit information from retrieved similar data to guide the backbone model’s exit. Based on those observations, we propose RAEE, aRetrieval-AugmentedEarlyExit framework that improves both efficiency and accuracy without training classifiers. Specifically, we construct a retrieval database from external data by recording exit layers where correct predictions occur. During the inference, RAEE retrieves the exit information of the top-k similar examples and aggregates the results to determine the final exit layer. In this section, we begin with the definition of the early exit problem, then present key observations that motivate our approaches. Given a backbone model M with m layers and an input x, an early exit framework aims to design an exit function or classifier l=f(x) to determine whether to exit at the layer l. The final prediction y is then transformed from the intermediate output states hl of the l-th layer. This perspective indicates thatintermediate layers can sometimes make better predictions than the output of the final layer. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the model can already make correct predictions within the intermediate layers (layers 10-15), rather than performing all computations to obtain the final predictions. This is because, in the worst case, the model can still obtain the correct predictions at the final layer even if the model cannot predict correctly in any intermediate layers. To validate this hypothesis, we build a retrieval database based on the exit behaviors of training data and collect the exit information of the top-8 nearest neighbors. Their probabilities of correct predictions are almost the same high at these intermediate layers (layers 10-15) compared to the final layer. The above observations motivate us to propose a retrieval-augmented early exit framework, which can not only accelerate the model inference by exiting from the intermediate layers but also further correct the model’s wrong predictions, thus improving model accuracy. 3 METHODOLOGY This section presents the retrieval-augmented early exit framework in detail. First, this paper outlines the process of collecting exit features and constructing the retrieval database to facilitate early exit. Consider the training data D={(x train 1 , ytrain 1 ), . ,(xtrain |D| , ytrain |D| )} and a backbone model M with m layers {L1, . The layer l chosen as the exit layer is determined by whether the outputs of this layer hl can be used to make the right predictions ˆycompared to the training labels ytrain. 3.2 THERETRIEVAL-AUGMENTEDEARLYEXITFRAMEWORK In this section, this paper then presents a retrieval-augmented early exit framework named RAEE to optimize the model inference. Given an input x, RAEE first retrieves top-k nearest neighbors {v1, . Then, the retriever in RAEE retrieves the top-k nearest neighbors in the retrieval databases based on the query embeddings. After obtaining all possible exit layers of k nearest neighbors, RAEE computes the exit layers based on the Equations 3-5. Finally, RAEE stops the forwarding at the calculated exit layer and passes the intermediate outputs of the exit layer to the final prediction layer, e.g., LM Head in language models, to obtain the final predictions. training-free settings for methods that require no parameter updates, and fine-tuning settings for methods that require searching for the optimal parameter of exit classifiers. Different from those works, our method does not require training the classifier. Our method uses pre-built databases to predict exit layers, achieving better generalization and even outperforming the full backbone model. A simple and effective method by retrieving from training data. Given the training data available for model inference D={(x train 1 , ytrain 1 ), . ,(xtrain |D| , ytrain |D| )}, backbone model M with m layers {L1, . , mdo 6:h j =L j(hj−1); /* Compute intermediate outputs at layerj*/ 7:logits=M lm_head(hj); /* Predict from the layerj*/ 8:ˆy= arg maxlogits; 9:p j i = max{softmax(logits)}; 10:ifˆyis equal toy train i then 11: Add allE(x train i )intoK; /* Store encoder embeddings */ 21:end if 22:returnK,V; C DETAILEDALGORITHMS OFRAEE Algorithm C.1 collects keys and values for building the retrieval database. For each sample in training data D, the backbone model M is traversed layer by layer to compute the hidden state hj and corresponding logits. If a prediction ˆyat a certain layer j matches the sample’s true label ytrain i , the exiting information, including the layer j and the probability pj i , is added to the sample’s value list (Line 2-12). D EXITLAYERS Table 9 compares the average exit layers of the RAEE method against two other method types across eight downstream tasks. This suggests that the RAEE method can accurately approximate the gold exit layer distribution by using the retrieval database. 1:h 0 =M emb(x); 2:ifEis not Nonethen 3:e query =E(x); /* Encode the inputs when the encoder is available */ 4:else 5:e query =h 0; /* Use the embeddings of backbone model */ 6:end if 7:{(v i, disi)}k i=1 =I(e query , k); /* Retrieve the possible exit layers */ 8:l=f({(v 1, dis1), . The sum of the number of layers in the encoder and the decoder counts the number of layers for T5-large (Raffel et al., 2020). Since DeeBERT(Xin et al., 2020) is a classical entropy-thresholding-based early-exit method, it requires first fine-tuning the backbone model on the downstream task and then updating all but the last off-ramp, for a fair comparison, we only update the off-ramp in DeeBERT on each downstream task. For each task, the x-axis denotes the exit layer index and the y-axis denotes the fraction of test samples that terminate at that layer. For each task, the x-axis is the exit layer and the y-axis is the proportion of samples that terminate at that layer.