REAL METHOD of "Variable Clustering via Distributionally Robust Nodewise Regression" (arXiv 2212.07944v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We validate our method in extensive numerical studies and demonstrate its superior performance. Then, the clusters can be recovered easily using, for example, spectral methods. To address these drawbacks, we propose a method that naturally incorporates regularization in the nodewise regression from the perspective of distributionally robust optimization (DRO). The superiority of our method compared with major peers is validated by extensive numerical experiments. In Section 3, we introduce our DRO nodewise regression method and present theoretical results. In comparison, we propose a method that naturally derives regularization in the nodewise regression by reformulating (2.3) in the context of distributionally robust optimization (DRO). Our method naturally extends to distributionally robustregularizednodewise regression, such as theL 1-regularized version (2.5) for sparse subspace clustering. To wit, the distributionally robust nodewise regression with squared loss (3.2) is approximately equiv- alent to a spectral-norm-regularized nodewise regression with square-root loss, where the strength of the regularization is controlled by the radius of the uncertainty regionδ. We propose an efficient algorithm based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) (Eckstein and Bertsekas, 1992; Boyd et al., 2010), which enjoys global convergence guarantees. Given an arbitrarily initializedB0 2 andΛ 0, we repeat the following steps: Problem (3.4) is strongly convex due to the quadratic penalty and thus can be solved by first-order algorithms. By virtue of this lemma, we can easily find the solution to (3.5) by computing the singular decomposition ofI−B t+1 1 −Λ t =UΣV ⊤, and then comparing the lossesPk j=1(σj −u) 2 + 2t √ δ/ρamong all k∈ {1, . 4 Simulation Experiments 4.1 Subspace clustering methods for comparison We first demonstrate our results through simulation. For the two methods above, the regression coefficientsBare obtained then symmetrized by calcu- latingC :=B ⊤ abs +B abs, where(B abs)ij =|b ij|. Clusters are then calculated using the spectral clustering algorithm in Ng et al. For example, the firstm1 variables are marked as Cluster 1, then the nextm2 Cluster 2. From this pool of candidate factors,dk group-specific factors are then randomly chosen for each clusterk. The ADMM algorithm reduces the runtime of the DRO clustering method by over 80% compared to off-the-shelf convex optimizers and is competitive with other clustering algorithms. The dataset consists of192×168pixel cropped face images of38 individuals, with64frontal face images for each subject acquired under various lighting conditions. For each image, we first downsample it to the size of24×21pixels and reshape it into a504- dimensional vector. We adopt the same sampling methodology as in Elhamifar and Vidal (2013), dividing the38 subjects into4groups, with the first three groups corresponding to subjects 1 to 10, 11 to 20, 21 to 30, and the fourth group corresponding to subjects 31 to 38. For each algorithm, we conduct three trials using the three sets of 10 subjects (1 to 10, 11 to 20, 21 to 30). Partitions and portfolios are calculated on the first trading day of each February, starting with February 2001, in the then S&P 500 constituent stock universe. 13 •DRO-ACC:First createK 1 clusters using the DRO subspace clustering algorithm, then split each cluster intoK2 sub-clusters using the ACC algorithm. •Lasso-ACC:First createK 1 clusters using the Lasso subspace clustering algorithm, then split each cluster intoK2 sub-clusters using the ACC algorithm. For each clustering method, once clusters have been constructed, we select the stock with the lowest volatility from each cluster and then form a portfolio on the resulting smaller set of stocks. In the results below, we update the portfolios once every year after the first trading day in February, when we re-do stock selection and re-compute allocation. 7 Conclusion In this paper, we propose a distributionally robust nodewise regression method and apply it to variable clustering. Compared with the popular sparse subspace clustering that uses nodewise Lasso, our method is tuning-free and has a naturally interpretable regularization. The only exogenous parameter of the algorithm is a confidence level1−α, which the algorithm is very insensitive to, as results are nearly identical with α= 0.01,0.05,0.1. Simulation experiments show that our subspace clustering method outperforms many other methods in the literature. We also apply our method to face clustering (and to financial time series data for asset selection, provided in Appendix 6) and obtain promising and superior results. On the douglas—rachford splitting method and the proximal point algorithm for maximal monotone operators.Mathematical programming55 293–318. InProceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Lemma A.2.Forγ≥0and loss functionsl(x,B)that are upper semi-continuous inxfor each B, define: ϕγ(xt;B) := sup u∈Rd {l(u;B)−γc(u, x t)}.(A.1) Then, sup P:Dc(P,Pn)≤δ EP[l(X;B)] = min γ≥0   γδ+ 1 n nX t=1 ϕγ(xt;B)    .(A.2) Recall that our loss function is the total squared error:l(X,B) = X−B ⊤X 2 2 =X ⊤HH ⊤X whereH :=I−B, and the cost function isc(u, w) =∥w−u∥ 2 2. Then, according to the first order condition, the supremum is achieved when(γI−HH⊤)∆ =HH ⊤xt, i.e.,∆ = (γI−HH ⊤)−1HH ⊤xt. First of all,Υ g has sized 4 and can be difficult to fit in the RAM of a consumer computer (e.g., when d= 500,Υ g is roughly 250 GB in float32 format). Then the diagonals ofΥg can be 27 computed3:(Υ g)ij,ij =σ iiσjj + (σij)2. We compare this method with Method 2, which directly applies the ACC algorithm on the full universe. At the end of the first trading day of each February, the above three clustering methods are applied to daily log returns in the backward500-trading-day window for valid constituent stocks as described in Section 6.2. For each clustering method, we create a total of 19 sets of clusters, one for each year. First, volatility as a criterion does 3The off-diagonals can also be computed:http://personal.psu.edu/drh20/asymp/fall2002/lectures/ln08. We only choose one stock with the lowest volatility from each cluster, yielding the same number of stocks as clusters for each clustering method every time we update the portfolio. The positions are then held until the first trading day of the following update.