REAL METHOD of "MultiHal: Multilingual Dataset for Knowledge-Graph Grounded Evaluation of LLM Hallucinations" (arXiv 2505.14101v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

MULTILINGUALDATASET FORKNOWLEDGE-GRAPH GROUNDEDEVALUATION OFLLM HALLUCINATIONS Ernests Lavrinovics∗ † Russa Biswas † Katja Hose ‡ Johannes Bjerva † † Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University ‡ Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien ABSTRACT Large Language Models (LLMs) have inherent limitations of faithfulness and factuality, commonly referred to as hallucinations. Although hallucinations may be beneficial for tasks involving creativity (Jiang et al., 2024) or even drug discovery (Yuan & Färber, 2025), they become a liability for other tasks that require factually consistent outputs, for example, information retrieval, summarization and question answering (Lavrinovics et al., 2025). Hallucinations can stem from multiple shortcomings in model training, such as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022), in cases when human preferences are towards non-factual answers (Zhang et al., 2023), instruction tuning where given instructions exceed a model’s knowledge boundary (Zhang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025b), or due to lack of up-to-date knowledge. The pipeline’s sequential steps are enumerated, Step 1.1 is an auxiliary step that maps DBpedia entities to Wikidata. To this end, Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) (Niu et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024) is the most widely adopted method for improving factuality, which supplements the input query to an LLM with relevant text passages to improve the factuality of LLM outputs. The main advantage of RAG is that it does not require retraining the generator LLM, a process that is time-consuming and resource-intensive. KG-RAG (Sanmartín, 2024; Peng et al., 2024) provides several advantages over document-based RAG and has also been suggested as a promising methodology for limiting LLM hallucinations (Pan et al., 2024; 2023), primarily leveraging the structural and factual qualities of the KGs through sets of KG-paths that describe entities and their relationships with minimal linguistic overheads. Furthermore, KG integration within language modeling can alleviate the need for full re-training when utilized during inference (Sun et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024) or post-generation (Guan et al., 2024). The structured, factually rich and linguistically minimal qualities of the KGs can potentially decrease the risks of theNeedle-in-a-Haystackproblem and limitations of the context window size. We propose a data collection framework as illustrated in Figure 1, to aggregate over 31k unique questions from aforementioned datasets, enriching them by mining 140k KG paths and ensuring factual consistency by filtering using LLM-as-a-judge. We propose a novel unified scalable framework that systematically integrates entity linking methods, mapping question-answer pairs to a KG, to curate factual information from KGs. We evaluate the quality of KG path filtering based on LLM-as-a-judge by analyzing their correlation with the semantic scores between predicted and gold answers for each question. The following sections scope into the methodological details of each of the processing stages of the proposed dataset collection framework. Additionally, we discard data points where the ground-truth answers are phrases such as"I have no comment", which indicate refusal to answer, and we define them asrefusal types. Falcon 2.0 is an open-sourced framework which is also made available via an API2 that we call to retrieve subjects from question Q and objects from answer A. Given a text passage, Falcon 2.0 outputs a ranked list of entities as candidates in Wikidata, we use the Top-3 candidates. For increased redundancy, we use Falcon 2.0 to additionally return DBpedia entities, which we then map back to Wikidata using the query in Listing 1 in Appendix D. The Wikipedia-to-Wikidataretrieval is done by taking the page title embedded in the given Wikipedia link and replacing it with the$WIKIPEDIA_IDplaceholder. TheTop-3 candidates,DBpedia-to-WikidataandWikipedia-to-Wikidataprocessing steps are all done for redundancy purposes to increase the chances of retrieving high quality KG paths. As additional pre-processing steps before querying, we remove circularsubject-object, as well as create an inverted set ofsubject-objectpairs to accommodate for the directionality of the Wikidata graph. LLMASJUDGE As a method for filtering out noisy KG paths and identifying high-quality paths, we employ a two-step LLM-as-a-judge methodology (Li et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2024): firstly, for questions with more than 10 candidate paths the top-10 paths selection is done to limit the total count; secondly, scoring each path individually to identify low and high quality paths. For inference we use OpenRouter API5 with sampling temperature0.1. Selection Step.We construct a prompt for selecting the 10 most relevant paths with respect to the question-answer, and available optional answer pairs. The set of paths for each question is processed in two passes, and in both scenarios, the order of the paths is shuffled to avoid any ordering biases (Li et al., 2025). Any generated paths that do not have an exact match are discarded to mitigate the risk of syntactic errors or hallucinations introduced by the LLM-as-a-judge as a method of quality control. The selection step is bypassed for questions that have 10 or fewer candidate paths. Scoring Step.Once a set of candidate paths is established, we construct another prompt for rating their relevance with respect to the given question and answer, and we process each path individually, see Appendix F Listing 9 for the instructions. 3 EXPERIMENTALSETUP The baseline experiments are set up using a prompt-based knowledge injection method. We measure the semantic similarity between ground-truths and model predictions using Multilingual- 5https://openrouter.ai/openai/gpt-4o-mini 5 Preprint MiniLM-L12-v26 (Wang et al., 2024), the choice of the sentence embedding model is based on results in the MMTE benchmark (Enevoldsen et al., 2025), its multilingual capabilities, and comparatively small parameter count. Semantic similarity is computed by mean-pooling the last hidden states per token for each sentence, applying L2 normalization and computing the dot-product between the ground-truth and LLM prediction representations. Additionally, we compute the Spearman correlation between the semantic similarity score and the quality scoreof each KG path, aiming to quantify the reliability of the quality score (see Section 2.3) determined by