REAL METHOD of "Exposing Vulnerabilities in Explanation for Time Series Classifiers via Dual-Target Attacks" (arXiv 2602.02763v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose TSEF (Time Series Ex- planation Fooler), a dual-target attack that jointly manipulates the classifier and explainer outputs. In contrast to single-objective misclassification attacks that disrupt explanation and spread attribu- tion mass broadly, TSEF achieves targeted predic- tion changes while keeping explanations consis- tent with the reference. While we can train models that clas- sify signals with high accuracy, we often cannot tell why they made a specific decision. In practice, such explanations are increasingly used for model debugging, ex- pert verification, and even adversarial monitoring, providing an appealing layer of human oversight (Rojat et al., 2021; ˇSimi´c et al., 2021). This joint control is fundamentally different from attacking classifiers alone, and is not addressed by existing attacks on time series classification (Ding et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025) or joint classification and explainer attacks in vision/NLP (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Ivankay et al., 2022), for two modality-specific rea- sons.First, pattern-level control is essential: Time series models respond to temporal structures (e.g., trend, and pe- riodic components), so naive per-timestep noise may not be strong enough to manipulate the model explanations or predictions.Second, time series exhibit a high-dimensional paradox: While the high-dimensional input offers a large norm-bounded attack surface, unconstrained optimization tends to produce dense, temporally incoherent updates that are difficult to steer toward a reference explanation, as re- vealed by our theoretical analysis in Section 4.1. • Systematic vulnerability study.We provide the first assessment of adversarial robustness in time series ex- plainers, showing they can be steered to match prescribed rationales even under target misclassification. dual-target, structured attack.We formulate a joint prediction–explanation objective and instantiate TSEF, decouplingwhento perturb (sparse, connected temporal mask) fromhowto perturb (frequency-domain filter) under a perturbation budget. Early works adapted generic attribution methods (e.g., In- tegrated Gradients) to the temporal domain (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Ismail et al., 2020). Time Series Explanations.An explanation method, or explainer, HE, is a function that computes the importance of each feature at each time step for a prediction. Threat Model and Adversarial Objectives.We operate under a white-box threat model, where the adversary has full knowledge of the target classifier f and the explainer HE. The perturbation is constrained to be small in the L∞ norm, i.e., ∥δ∥∞ ≤ϵ , to ensure it is not easily detectable. TSEF In this section, we first introduce the high-dimensional para- dox challenge in attacking time series classifiers and ex- plainers, and then propose our solution TSEF. they use the full high-dimensional input space (d=T×D ) to optimize a classification objective only. We quantify this conflict through the amount of attribution assignedoutsidethe target region. Theorem 4.1(Dense ℓ∞ steps increase attribution outside the target region).Let gc :=∇ XLcls(f(X), ytgt) denote the gradient of the target-label classification loss, and con- sider the one-step dense ℓ∞ update δ:=−εsign(g c) and ˜X=X+δ . Then for anyε∈ h 4β0 γ , γ 2L i , E h ∥A( ˜X)∥1,Ωc i ≥c ε(d− |Ω|),(1) for some constantc >0independent ofd. (1) states that after a single dense ℓ∞ step, the total absolute attribution outside the target region Ω is lower bounded and scales with the number of coordinates outside Ω; Eq. Motivation for TSEF.A natural baseline is to optimize a joint objective Lcls +λL exp under the same ℓ∞ budget. the classification term encourages changes spread across many coordinates (i.e, time steps and channels), while matching a localized reference rationale requires keeping the explanation concentrated within Ω. We learn(M t,M f )by minimizing the following loss: The pseudo algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1 in Appendix C. TEMPORALVULNERABILITYMASK A temporal pattern isvulnerableif suppressing it most effectively advances thejointobjective (target prediction and reference explanation). We optimize Mt in the inner loop to localize a compact region whose removal most improves the joint target objective. Full Inner Objective.For each input X, we optimize Mt by minimizing the joint adversarial and regularization loss: We adapt baselines to the targeted setting by optimizing a targeted classification toward y′; To adapt ADV 2 to time series, we replace its interpretation loss with a time series explanation-alignment term toward A′, so that all meth- ods are evaluated under the same targeted objectives as TSEF. Target objectives.For each correctly classified test in- stance with label y, we sample y′ ̸=y uniformly from the remaining classes and optimize a dual-target objective that (i) drives the predictor toward y′ and (ii) forces the expla- nation to match a reference explanation mask A′. We define the reference rationale A′ as the interpreter’s top- 10% salient features on the clean input, and optimize the dual-target objective to preserve this reference while forcing y′. Future research should develop coupling- aware defenses and audits that explicitly constrain predictor– explainer behavior, and extend evaluations to realistic, con- strained threat models to restore trust in high-stakes settings. (2020) benchmark saliency methods for multivariate time series on synthetic data with ground-truth temporal–feature importance, finding that many explainers are unreliable across RNN/TCN/Transformer backbones; they also propose Temporal Saliency Rescaling (TSR) to improve localization by first identifying salient time steps and then refining per-feature attributions within them. , Kt do 8:Sample binary mask ˜Mt ∼Concrete(M t){Gumbel-Sigmoid relaxation} 9:X ′ ←X i ⊙(1− ˜Mt) 10:Compute lossL t(Mt) 11:M t ←Π [0,1] (Mt −η t ·sign(∇ Mt Lt)){Amplitude-invariant update} 12:end for 13:// Stage 2: cW← F(˜Mt ⊙X i) 17:Compute unit perturbation:∆X base ← F−1(cW⊙tanh(Θ f )) 18:Compute scaling:α freq ←γ ϵ′ ∥∆Xbase∥∞+τ 19:Construct filter:M f ←Π [0,2](1 +α freq tanh(Θf )) 20:Reconstruct: ˜X←X i ⊙(1− ˜Mt) +F −1(cW⊙M f ) 21:Compute attack lossJ atk( ˜X) 22:Θ f ←Θ f −η f ·sign(∇ Θf Jatk){Energy-invariant update} 23:end for 24:Clip the perturbed input to satisfy the norm constraint: (i)Temporal Vulnerability Masklearns a sparse, connected support Mt that identifies vuln