REAL METHOD of "Active Budget Allocation for Efficient Scaling Law Estimation via Surrogate-Guided Pruning" (arXiv 2605.17234v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

These de- scribe the relationship between loss and compute using a loss-compute frontier defined by learn- ing curves. In addition to enabling a more systematic allocation of a given compute budget, our findings show that SH paired with surrogate models yields a set of learning curves that in- cludes one with a lower loss-compute value than what naive uniform allocation or an SH-only ap- proach can obtain. Recent studies have required training hundreds of models across different parameter sizes and training dura- tions (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). However, training all models to full convergence is computationally wasteful and expensive, making such studies infeasible in budget-constrained settings. plore cost-effective approaches to obtain compute-loss fron- tiers for scaling law research in budget-constrained experi- mental settings. Given a family of models with no prior information and a fixed computational budget, we use our methods to strategically allocate resources to a set of models of various sizes to obtain their learning curves. Sequential strategies such as Freeze-Thaw BO (Swersky et al., 2014) and its variants select configurations one at a time, which is structurally misaligned with our need to train all models in parallel to obtain a dense compute-loss frontier. We define alearning curve L(C) as the validation loss L of a model given its compute C. Among the various approaches 1016 1018 1020 Compute 101 Loss Learning Curves Compute Efficient Frontier Scaling Law log(L) = 0.058log(C) + 3.62 Figure 2.A set of learning curves (LCs) obtained from training a variety of nanoGPT models. (2022), we focus on the one most relevant to this work, which is to fit the following functional form to the loss-compute frontier in a compute region of interest (Kaplan et al., 2020; Pearce & Song, 2024): Theoretically, an infinitely large budget could be used to train each model until con- vergence – however, might result in arbitrarily (and unnec- essarily) large amounts of compute Cm assigned to each model m. In contrast, considering a more realistic setup of having a limited total compute budget B, each Cm needs to bechosensuch that the compute will be distributed among all models in M; and should ideally be limited for those models early in the process whose learning curves will not be able to contribute to the loss-compute frontier. Then, given a total budget B, our objective of strategically allocating computational budget to each model m is defined as arg max C1,...,Cm G(M)s.t.C M ≤B.(1) There are two major challenges in solving this problem. allocating budget across the set of mod- els in pursuit of finding the model that reaches minimum validation loss within our budget constraint arg min m∈M Lm(C)s.t.C M ≤B.(2) The budget constraint makes the problem non-trivial: In contrast to this original objective, our main goal isnot to ultimately identify the single best-performing model as a function of the compute – rather, we aim to obtain aset of near-optimally trained models within the available com- pute. The original SH algorithm now simply retrieves the learning curves for all m∈ Mr (line 3) and selects the most promising models based on theircur- rentvalidation losses (line 4). Note that while this process solves the proxy task (Equa- tion (2)) – namely, selecting the most promising models in each round – the iterative and strategic allocation of bud- get results in the full model set M, where each model was trained as long as it was considered likely to contribute to the loss-compute frontier. In this way, our method approximates the ideal allocation objective described in Equation (1), and allows us to obtain a scaling law from the resulting set of learning curves L. Deep Ensemble (DE) Methods.As an alternative to our non-parametric LMC surrogate model, we also explore a parametric approach in the form of Deep Ensemble methods for loss-compute curve extrapolation (Kadra et al., 2023). Strategic Budget Allocation and the Benefit of Surrogate Models In the first set of experiments, we evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed strategic budget allocation via both Succes- sive Halving (SH) and SH with the non-parametric LMC surrogate model in solving the proxy task of obtaining a set of well-trained models that yield low validation loss. Small models generally need less compute to fulfill one training iteration and reach smaller loss values earlier (see Figures 1 and 3). The regret on loss shows how close the respective method (SH or SH LMC) was on average to the minimum loss that could be obtained if all models m∈ M0 were fully trained. We also report the average compute cost of obtaining the entire set of LCs, along with the relative savings achieved by our method. 6.27293 Training Data Compute Efficient Frontier Kaplan Ground Truth log(L) = 0.097 log(C) + 5.32 Kaplan Obtained log(L) = 0.122 log(C) + 6.22 1014 1016 1018 1020 1022 C 100 101 Loss Kaplan Scaling Law, aoi: rather than wasting compute on sub-optimal models, our approach reallocates those resources to train a greater number of models that lie closer to the loss-compute frontier. Scaling laws and compute-optimal training beyond fixed training durations. However, these methods focus on extracting insights about 13 Active Budget Allocation for Efficient Scaling Law Estimation via Surrogate-Guided Pruning scaling behavior from existing evaluation or training data; whereas our work in contrast focuses on optimizing the allocation of compute to actively generate the underlying learning curves themselves. In this step, each model is trained with budget Cr, either for the first time ( r= 0 ) or as a continuation of its learning curve. Obtain LCs Algorithm 2obtain LCs(m,C 0:r):m∈ Mr 1:form←0to|M r| −1do 2:D r m = Cr 6Nm 3:ifr= 0then 4:Train modelmfor one epoch usingD 0 m andC r. In round r, the input to this algorithm are the models m∈ Mr and the compute budgets allocated from the very first round r= 0 until the current round r given by C0:r. Small models generally need less compute to fulfill one training iteration and reach smaller loss values earlier (see Figure 6). As previously detailed, only the ‘most-promising’ models selected to train further will be allocated more compute in the next round – resulting in the different end-compute values for the LCs (here between10 16-1019), based on the number of rounds the models participated in. Then stepsm =  Cm Nmx  ,(3) giving us the correct steps size to t