REAL METHOD of "Mixture of Horizons in Action Chunking" (arXiv 2511.19433v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

ii) MoH is plug- and-play for full-attention action modules with minimal training or inference overhead. Typically, modern VLAs adopt this action module with full attention and an action chunkingstrategy, allowing the model to predict a sequence of future actions conditioned on the current ob- servation and instruction. As illustrated in Figure 2, MoH rearranges each action chunk into multiple segments with different horizons, processes them in parallel using a shared action transformer, and fuses their predictions at each timestep via a lightweight linear gating layer with only 2k additional pa- rameters. It can be seamlessly plugged into any full-attention action module, re- gardless of whether it is flow-based or single-step prediction- based. Recent advanced VLA models are typically built upon a pre- trained VLM backbone that encodes (Vt, h<t, T, st) into a context representation, followed by a compactaction trans- formeroperating on action tokens. One-step policies.One-step policies directly map the con- text to the final action chunk in a single forward pass: The loss is Lcls(θ) =− HX k=1 daX d=1 logp θ(yk,d |V t, h<t, T, st).(7) (ii) Continuous regression.Alternatively, the policy directly regresses continuous actions, e.g., with anℓ 1 loss: Lreg(θ) = HX k=1 daX d=1 ˆAt,k,d −A t,k,d .(8) Both flow-matching and one-step policies can be built on the basic full-attention action transformer with minor modifica- tions. Specifically, flow-matching requires a time embed- ding layer, while one-step prediction can be implemented by introducing a learnable query token. For efficient 3 Mixture of Horizons in Action Chunking Pre-trainedVLMKVs Action predictions in different horizons(e.g., 𝑢! for flow-matching, 𝑎 for one-step prediction) Initial action chunks in different horizons(e.g., 𝑥!for flow-matching, 𝑞 for one-step prediction) ...... This strategy is plug-and-play for any full-attention action transformer, including both flow-matching and one-step policies. Since the VLM prefix is only computed once and the action trans- former is lightweight, our MoH strategy adds negligible computational overhead in both training and inference. a linear layer is added on top of the shared action transformer as a gating head, which produces logits gt,k,h for each step k and horizon h. (12) The final fused prediction at stepkis ˆat,k = X h∈H:k≤h αt,k,h ˆa(h) t,k .(13) This simplest gating leaves the backbone unchanged and applies to any full-attention action transformer, seamlessly integrating with both flow-matching and one-step policies. ¯dk ← P h∈Hk αk · ∥ˆa−ˆak∥ {disagreements} 6:end for 7:thres←Mean({ ¯dk}n k=1)·r{threshold} 8:K exec ←n 9:fork=n+ 1toHdo 10:if|H k|< mor ¯dk > thresthen 11:break 12:end if 13:K exec ←k 14:end for 15:return{ˆa k}Kexec k=1 Balance loss for horizon utilization.Without regulariza- tion, the gating network may collapse to some preferred horizons, preventing others from contributing. For each interval (hi−1, hi], the active horizons are Hi ={h∈ H:h > h i−1}, and Si denotes the set of steps in this interval. Training objective.Let Lmix denote the loss computed on the fused predictions {ˆat,k}, and Lind = P h∈H L(h) the sum of losses on the individual horizon-specific predic- tions { ˆA(h) t }. For one-step policies, they are the corresponding classification or regression objectives introduced in Section 3.1. Intuitively, it is better to commit more steps and reduce replanning when the motion is simple and low-risk, and commit fewer steps and replan more often when nearing decision points or during fine- grained manipulation. As illustrated in Algorithm 1, at each step, horizon-wise predictions {ˆak}H k=1 serve as voters on the fused actions ˆa. The first n steps pro- vide a data-dependent threshold, and we execute the longest action prefix whose disagreement remains below this thresh- old while enough horizons are still active. Experimental Setup Simulation Setup.We evaluate our method on three widely used simulation benchmarks: Following the official settings of the π-series, we train all models once on the mixed LIBERO training set containing all four task suites. Regarding RoboTwin, again following the official config- uration, we train each model for 20 epochs using 50 clean demonstrations per task, training a separate policy for each of the selected tasks. For RoboCasa, we train StarVLA-GR00T on 1,000 trajecto- ries (200 demonstrations per task) in total and execute the first 10 steps of each predicted chunk at evaluation, report- ing the average success rate and standard deviation across three random seeds with150rollouts per task. Following the official LIBERO setting, only the first 5 action steps of each predicted chunk are executed during evaluation. Given that LIBERO’s training and evaluation settings are highly in-distribution, this indicates that the regression objective converges well on small-scale downstream tasks, further supporting the soundness of theπ reg design. (i) MoH with 10 identical horizons (all H=30) to isolate the ensemble effect, (ii) temporal loss reweighting without MoH, (iii) uniform mean fusion over valid horizons (no gating head), (iv) MoH without the balance lossL bal, and (v) our full MoH with gated fusion andL bal. First, we test whether the gains can be attributed purely to loss weighting rather than multi-horizon modeling. Motivated by the implicit emphasis on early steps induced by the MoH objective, we construct aloss reweighting onlyvariant that applies analo- gous temporal weights directly to the single-horizon π0.5, without introducing additional horizons or gating. 95 96 97 98 99 Success Rate (%) in LIBERO-Long !!.#-95.4 Dynamic Inference 57 1012Step Num r=1A.S=6.597.5 !!.#with MoH 98.4 r=1.1A.S=8.596.4r=1.2, A.S=10,495.8r=1.3A.S=11.895.8 r=1.4A.S=12.796.2 149 step=797.2 step=996step=1095.4step=1295.8step=1495 Fixed-length Prefix Actions Throughputx 2.5 Figure 6.Dynamic inference v.s. Effect of gating balance loss.Finally, we evaluateMoH w/o Lbal to assess the role of the balance loss. We define throughputas the average number of action steps executed per predicted chunk, i.e., the utilization rate of the generated actions rather than wall-clock test time or per-forward infer- ence latency, and use it as the efficiency metric throughout this subsection. MoH fuses acrossdifferent horizons within a single planning step, whereas ATE fuses acrossactions at the same timestep but from different decision steps. The limitations