REAL METHOD of "Efficient Skill Grounding via Code Refactoring with Small Language Models" (arXiv 2606.07999v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

By repre- senting skills as executable code, RECENT pre- serves the semantic intent encoded in a skill’s control structure while grounding it by modify- ing only execution bindings through localized refactoring, rather than regenerating code from scratch. Across all scenarios, RECENT achieves the best performance among sLM-based Code-as-Policies (CaP) methods and matches the task performance of LLM-based CaP. Introduction Recent embodied control systems increasingly exploit the planning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to solve tasks by composing learned skills represented as neu- 1Department of Computer Science and Engineer- ing, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Ko- rea 2Department of Systems Management Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea. However, be- cause robots differ in morphology, actuation, and sensing, and task environments vary in object properties, physical constraints, and operational conditions, the executability of a skill is highly deployment-dependent, rendering direct skill reuse across contexts infeasible. Such designs incur substantial computational overhead, fre- quently requiring additional training to relearn neural sub- policies when deployment conditions change. Representing skills as executable code partially alleviates this issue by enabling grounding through inference at test time rather than retraining. - W = Wo r l d ( e nv, " f ra nk a" ) + W = World(env,"ur 5 ") Environment update Failed to grab Figure 1.Key concept comparing (top) the skill grounding pro- cedure used in existing approaches with (bottom) our refactoring- centric skill grounding procedure. Guided by this ontology, we construct (i) an offline skill repository using an LLM, in which semantic in- tent is explicitly encoded in executable skill code along with metadata describing functional requirements and adaptation cues. Embodiment mis- matches are amenable to sLM-based editing because rel- evant execution bindings are explicitly identified through ontology-level comparisons between skill requirements and target robot capabilities, constraining grounding to local- ized pre-execution code edits. We evaluate RECENT across diverse skill grounding sce- narios using sLMs under deployment constraints, spanning multiple robot embodiments, dynamic environments, and capacity-limited device settings. Specifically, we design diverse long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks spanning multiple robot embodiments in CoppeliaSim (Rohmer et al., 2013) and Genesis (Genesis Authors, 2024). • We present RECENT , a refactoring-centric agent frame- work that enables efficient skill grounding with sLMs un- der deployment constraints, making long-horizon control practical without reliance on large-scale LLM inference. Rather than mapping in- 2 Efficient Skill Grounding via Code Refactoring with Small Language Models structions to a fixed set of predefined skills, these methods prompt LLMs to generate Python-like programs that directly invoke perception and motor APIs, enabling motion-level control in embodied agents. Unlike existing approaches that rely on large-scale LLMs at deployment, our work focuses on reliable long-horizon embodied control under deploy- ment constraints by representing skills as reusable code and enabling sLMs to ground them through localized code refactoring rather than regeneration from scratch. Parametric approaches typically ground such skills through retraining or fine-tuning neural policies, mapping abstract skill repre- sentations to concrete robot actions while entangling task semantics with execution details within the learned poli- cies (Xu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Doshi et al., 2024). Programmatic control has also been applied to embodied agents, enabling code generation and execution over perception and control modules (Liang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023b). Due to partial observability (Sutton & Barto, 2018), at each timestep t the agent receives an observation ot that provides incomplete information about the underlying state st ∈ S. We denote by G ⊂ Sthe set of goal states, and define each task τ as a composite objective consisting of multiple individual goals g∈ G. Our objective is to optimize an sLM πsLM over a set of tasks T to maximize task suc- cess rates while minimizing skill grounding overhead and preserving execution continuity: Approach We present RECENT , a code refactoring-centric agent framework that enables sLMs to perform efficient skill grounding under deployment constraints, ensuring task suc- cess, minimizing grounding overhead, and preserving ex- ecution continuity. The ontology encodes 3 Efficient Skill Grounding via Code Refactoring with Small Language Models Undetermined warnings Vegetables sliced into pieces Robot embodiment Semantic relations MainTaskCode RECENT knife_pos = knife_handle_pos.copy() knife_pos[2] += l ... During execution, environment-related factors, such as object properties, contact dynamics, partial observabil- ity, and scene constraints, may remain undetermined. We adopt a skill ontology as a logical knowledge base that encodes skill semantics, robot embodiment capabilities, and semantic relations be- tween them following (Tenorth & Beetz, 2017). Specifi- cally, the ontology captures skill’s functional intent, includ- ing preconditions, and expected effects, as well as robot embodiment profiles, such as available primitive APIs and execution constraints. In addition, it encodes semantic re- lations between skills and capabilities, including requires, provides, and substitutable-by. 4 Efficient Skill Grounding via Code Refactoring with Small Language Models Skill ontology querying.Based on the skill ontology, we define an ontology query operator Q that extracts a robot- conditioned skill specification by retrieving ontology facts consistent with both the skill definition and the target em- bodiment. For a skillχ∈ Xand a robotr∈ R, we define: Q(χ, r) =⟨C(χ),P(χ),E(χ),I(χ, r)⟩.(2) Here, C(χ) denotes the set of required capabilities and operational constraints specified for skill χ (e.g., gripper type, sensing modalities), P(χ) denotes preconditions that must hold before execution (e.g., object visibility, reachable poses, collision-free workspaces), and E(χ) denotes the ex- pected effects after execution (e.g., object pose changes, grasp success, state transitions). Ontology-based compatibility analysis.Given a target robot rtgt, RECENT queries the skill ontology to assess