REAL METHOD of "CLoVE: Personalized Federated Learning through Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings" (arXiv 2506.22427v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Personalized Federated Learning through Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings Randeep Bhatia * 1 Nikos Papadis * 1 Murali Kodialam 1 TV Lakshman 1 Sayak Chakrabarty 2 Abstract We proposeCLoVE(Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings), a novel algorithm for Clustered Federated Learning (CFL). CLoVEutilizes client embeddings derived from model losses on client data, and leverages the insight that clients in the same cluster share sim- ilar loss values, while those in different clusters exhibit distinct loss patterns. Our com- prehensive experiments comparing with a variety of both CFL and generic Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) algorithms on different types of datasets and an extensive array of non-IID settings demonstrate thatCLoVEachieves highly accurate cluster recovery in just a few rounds of training, along with state-of-the-art model accuracy, across a variety of both supervised and unsupervised PFL tasks. To achieve this goal, identifying the cluster assignments for each client is crucial, as it enables the construction of accurate, cluster- specific models that capture the unique characteristics of each group. 𝜃1 𝜃2 Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Parameters 1.0 2.1 3.5 5.1 𝜃1 ∗ 𝜃2 ∗𝜃1 𝜃2 Losses Loss on model 1 Loss on model 2 Figure 1. Moreover, because of this assignment, model θ2 receives no updates, and therefore its loss stays high; as a result, no clients ever select it in future rounds. In contrast, clustering based on loss vectors (right) achieves accurate client partitioning, as the loss vectors of clients from different clusters are highly distinct. For instance, the Iterative Federated Clustering Algorithm (IFCA) (Ghosh et al., 2020) assigns clients to clusters based on the model that yields the lowest empirical loss. 1, this issue typically occurs when clients from two or more clusters achieve the lowest loss on the same model, and thus get assigned to the same cluster. In this paper, we propose the Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings (CLoVE) PFL algorithm, a novel approach to tackle both the challenges of constructing accurate cluster- specific models and recovering the underlying cluster as- signments in a FL setting. The underlying principle of our approach is that clients within the same cluster will exhibit similar loss patterns, whereas those from different clusters will display distinct loss patterns across models. By analyzing and comparing these loss patterns through the clustering of loss vectors, our approach effectively separates clients from different clusters while grouping those from the same cluster together. Personalized Federated Learning through Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings pose a novel approach that simultaneously builds mul- tiple personalized models and generates client embed- dings based on model losses, enabling effective clus- tering of clients with unknown cluster labels. Our method, un- like most others, extends to both supervised and unsu- pervised settings, handling a variety of data distribu- tions, sparse client participation, and stragglers through a simple, loss-based embedding approach. Unlike existing methods,CLoVEdoes not require careful initializa- tion of cluster models, thereby mitigating the risk of inaccurate cluster assignments due to initialization sen- sitivities. Clustered Federated Learning (CFL) is an emerging ap- proach in PFL that involves clustering clients based on simi- larity measures to train specialized models for each cluster (e.g.IFCAbased on model loss values, (Werner et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024) andFlexCFLbased on gradients). Despite their effectiveness, these methods often require complex similarity computations, additional communication steps, or additional amount of state kept at the server. Improved algorithms (Vardhan et al., 2024) address some limitations of earlier approaches that require care- ful initialization likeIFCA, but their methods are complex. OurCLoVEalgorithm overcomes these drawbacks using a simple method that utilizes robust loss-based embeddings, converges quickly to the correct clusters, eliminates the need for precise initialization, and operates in a variety of both supervised and unsupervised settings. Embeddings-driven Federated Clustering The typical FL architecture consists of a server and a number of clients. The goal in CFL is to simultaneously cluster the clients into K clusters and train K models to minimize the population loss function Lj(θ)≜E z∼Dj [f(θ;z)] for each cluster j∈[K] . The pseudocode of ourClustering of Loss Vector Embed- dings(CLoVE) PFL algorithm is shown in Alg. Each of these clients runs its data through all models and gets the losses, which form one loss vector of length ˆK per client. These loss vectors are then sent to the server (lines 6-8). Personalized Federated Learning through Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings Algorithm 1Clustering of Loss Vector Embeddings (CLoVE) algorithm for PFL Input: initialize model parameters θ(0) j for each of the K (0) modelsj∈[K (0)], whereK (0) = ˆK 2:forroundt= 0,1, ..., T−1do 3:M (t) ← random subset of ρ fraction of the clients (deals with partial participation/stragglers) 4:ifclustering has not stabilizedthen 5: It then groups clients into K (t+1) clusters (line 12) by clustering their loss vectors (e.g. After the algorithm reaches a stable state, the server no longer needs to compute loss vectors or perform clustering. For any client that does not yet have an assigned model, the server assigns it the model whose cluster centroid is closest to the client’s loss vector using the models and centroids saved at the point of stability (line 16). For each candidate K, the loss vectors are clustered and the silhouette score of the resulting clustering is computed. Local-only, where each client trains its model locally;Fe- dAvg, which learns a single global model; clustered fed- erated learning methods, includingCFL-S(Sattler et al., 2021),IFCA(Ghosh et al., 2020),FlexCFL(Duan et al., 2022),FeSEM(Long et al., 2023), andPACFL(Vahidian et al., 2023); and general PFL methodsFedProto(Tan et al., 2022),Per-FedAvg(Fallah et al., 2020),FedALA(Zhang et al., 2023), andFedPAC(Xu et al., 2023). The first 3 columns show the ARI reached within 10 rounds for each algorithm.CLoVEoutperforms all base- lines here. Table 4.Unsupervised test loss results for MNIST, CIFAR-10 and FMNIST Algorithm MNIST CIFAR-10 FMNIST FedAvg0.032±0.001 0.026±0.000 0.030±0.000 Local-only0.019±0.000 0.022±0.000 0.170±0.000 IFCA0.024±0.0050.019±0.0000.020±0