REAL METHOD of "Robust Learning via Nested Distributionally Robust Optimization" (arXiv 2105.00760v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We illustrate the modeling power of our approach through convex reformulations for distrib utionally robust optimization problems whose ambiguity sets are deﬁned through general optima l transport distances, which generalize earlier results for Wasserstein ambiguity sets. Section 2 ﬁrst revisits classical duality results for convex optimization and derives explicit dual o ptimization problems involving the con- jugates of the objective and constraint functions. Our anal ysis allows the objective and constraint functions of the primal problem to be arbitrary extended rea l-valued proper, closed and convex func- tions. This generality is crucial since we will dualize prob lems that involve implicit constraints or conjugates, but it signiﬁcantly complicates our analysis. (i) We propose a uniﬁed theory of robust (Section 3) and distribu tionally robust optimization with moment-based (Sections 4 and 5) and optimal transport- based (Section 6) ambiguity sets. (ii) Classical texts on robust optimization either study robust programs with linear (or quadratic) constraint functions and conic inequalities (Ben-Tal et al ., 2009; Ben-Tal and Nemirovski, 1998) or they study robust programs with nonlinear (convex- concave) constraint functions but classical inequalities (Ben-Tal et al., 2005). If the embedded maximization problems represent linear con ic optimization problems, then the duals can be constructed explicitly in terms of the original problem data (Ben-Tal et al., 2009). Instead, the d ual objective function is only implicitly deﬁned as the inﬁmum of the Lagrangian function with respect to the uncertain parameters. (2015) show that the optimal values of the embedded maximization problems can be expressed as diﬀerences between the support f unction of the uncertainty set and the partial conjugates of the constraint (or objective) fun ctions with respect to the uncertain parameters. 5 2 Convex Optimization In this section we adapt existing duality results to generic convex optimization problems with extended real-valued objective and constraint functions. This ﬂexibility allows us to work with optimization problems whose objective and constraints inv olve conjugates. f i(x)≤ 0 ∀i∈I x free (P) Primal Problem Here, the objective and constraint functions are extended r eal-valued functions fi : In the remainder of this section, we assume that problem (P) is convex, that is, we assume that its objective and constraint functions satisfy the fol lowing regularity condition. f i(x,zi)≤ 0 ∀i∈I x free (P-S) Primal Scenario Problem whose objective and constraint functions fi : Even more, we assume that its objective and constraint functions display a saddle structure in the sens e of the following regularity condition. Note that the objective function (2a) of (AP-W) is proper, convex and closed in the decision variab les and constant in the uncertain parameters, while the constraint functions (2b) of (AP-W) a re bi-aﬃne in the decision variables and the uncertain parameters. First, we evaluate the parti al conjugates of the objective and constraint functions (2) wi th respect to the uncertain parameters and evaluate the conjugates of the constraint functions deﬁ ning the uncertain sets. Similarly, substituting t he objective and constraint functions (2) as well as the constraint functions deﬁning Ui into (D-B ′) yields the following convex program. Also, if (τ ⋆,λ ⋆,{ω ⋆ i,v⋆ i}i) solves (AD-B′), then the discrete distribution that assigns probabilityλ⋆ i to the point v⋆ i/λ⋆ i for every i∈I with λ⋆ i > 0 solves (P-UQ). The deﬁnitions of Slater points for optimization problems i nvolving only classical constraints can now be generalized to optimization problems involving c onic constraints by replacing the weak and strict inequalities of Deﬁnition 1 with ⪯ Ci and≺Ci, respectively, where Ci is a proper convex cone for all i∈I (cf. Assumption (Sg) may be imposed without much loss of generality because any di stribution P∈ Pg assigns a strictly positive probability pk to the event ˜z ∈ ¯Sk and because the conditional distribution P(·| ˜z∈ ¯Sk) must be supported on ¯Sk. Also, if ({τ ⋆ k}k,{λ ⋆ k}k,{ω ⋆ ijk}ijk,{v⋆ ik}ik) solves (AD-B′ g), then the discrete distribu- tion that assigns probability λ⋆ ik to the point v⋆ ik/λ⋆ ik for every i∈I k and k∈K with λ⋆ ik > 0 solves (P-UQg). Also, if ( {τ ⋆ k}k,{λ ⋆ k}k,{ω⋆ ik}ik,{v⋆ ik}ik) solves (AD-B ′ OT), then the dis- crete distribution that assigns probability λ⋆ ik to the point v⋆ ik/λ⋆ ik for every i∈I k and k∈K with λ⋆ ik > 0 solves (OT). A solution is feasible in an optim ization problem if it satisﬁes all the constraints and attains an objective value other than + ∞ (−∞) in a minimization (maximization) problem; otherwise, it is infeasible. As the objective and constraint functions of problem (P) are proper and convex by assumption (F), the Lagrangian L (x,λ ) is proper and convex in x for every ﬁxed λ≥ 0. Stro ng duality between (P) and (D) as well as the solvability of (P) then follow from Lemm a B.1 and Proposition 5.3.6 by Bertsekas (2009), which applies because (D) has a ﬁnite su premum and admits a Slater point that satisﬁes all explicit (linear) constraints and reside s in the relative interior of the objective function. Setting λ + = 1 > 0, it is then easy to verify that ( {w+ i}i,λ +) resides within the relative interior of the domain of the objective function of (D). To show that (P-W ′) upper bounds (P-W), we dualize the embed- ded maximization problems in (P-W) that evaluate the worst- case uncertainty realizations in the objective and the constraint functions. Substituting the resulting min- imization problem into (P-W) for every i∈I 0 and then merging the inﬁmum operators in the objective and removing the inﬁmum operators in the constrai nts yields (P-W ′), and thus the in- ﬁmum of (P-W) is indeed smaller or equal to that of (P-W ′). Note that if the optimal solution of (15b) is not attained for some i∈I , then removing the inﬁmum operators in the constraints may lead to a further restriction of the problem and therefor e result in a higher optimal value. The minimization problems resulting from interchan ging the minus sign and the supremum operator in (15b) can then be substituted back into (16), the inﬁmum operators in the objective 48 can be merged, and the inﬁmum operators in the constraints ca n be removed to obtain a variant of (P-W ′) with strict inequalities. Note that because the constrain ts in (16) are strict, the inﬁmum