REAL METHOD of "BEAR: Dissecting Embodied Abilities in Multimodal Language Models through Skill-level Evaluation and Diagnosis" (arXiv 2510.08759v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this, we introduce BEAR, where we divide embodied tasks into 14 atomic skills forskill-level evaluation. Fur- thermore, building on these insights, we propose BEAR-AGENT, a multimodal conversable agent that augments MLLMs with visual and spatial tools. Others treat each task as an indivisible unit and relying on final binary success (Yang et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2023) and they collapse long-horizon decision-making steps into a single outcome, making it challenging to attribute failures to specific perceptual or rea- soning capabilities. To overcome the shortcomings, we proposeskill-level eval- uationframework, where each skill is a atomic capability- oriented step for embodied task execution. 2,(1)we propose BEAR, the first embodied benchmarkexplicitly designed for capability diagnosisrather than task success. 3), BEAR inductively summarize embodied tasks into atomic skills, each skill is a structured perceptual and reasoning step. Crucially, we propose ahierarchical skill-level diagnosis frameworkgrounded in our struc- 1 arXiv:2510.08759v3 [cs.CV] 15 Aug 2026 BEAR: None of the above D.To back-right of me Task Planning Figure 1.BEARis the first diagnostic benchmark for evaluating MLLMs in embodied capabilities. The performance limitations can not be effec- tively addressed by Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting or test time compute scaling. Motivated by these findings, we propose an actionable im- provement: providing additional visual and spatial cues that is not readily accessible from original input to MLLMs.(3) To this end, we introduceBEAR-AGENT, a multimodal agent which interacts with an MLLM through dialogue and leverages a set of external tools to supply additional visual and spatial information. • We introduceBEAR, the first systematic embod- ied diagnostic benchmark with 4,469 interleaved im- age–video–text samples. • We propose a hierarchical skill-level diagnosis and cross-skill failure attribution framework. 1, BEAR is the first comprehensive benchmark for embodied capabilities, featuring 4,469 interleaved image- video-text samples. Using the activity of rinsing a cup as an example:(1) Task Planninginvolves questions about both past and future actions, including two skills,Task Process Reasoning(e.g., recognizing the agent is already picking up the cup) andNext Action Prediction(e.g., inferring the next step is to approach the faucet).(2) Spatial Reasoning captures the ability to localize objects and navigate within environment. Long-horizoncategory for the first time decomposes em- bodied tasks into skill-oriented steps.This category fea- tures 35 episodes collected from AI2-THOR (Ehsani et al., 2021), each decomposed into structured skill-oriented steps foroffline evaluation. In Figure 3, an episode with high- level goal ‘put the apple in the sink’ is broken down into a chain of steps: the agent must first plan its next action, search for the sink’s location, chart a path towards it, reason about its relative position, visually perceive the sink, and finally predict the trajectory to place the apple inside. In this work, we introduce BEAR- Agent, a conversable multimodal agent that integrates pretrained vision models to enhance perception, 3D understanding, and planning, offering a more targeted step toward robust multimodal embodied intelligence. Each episode is with a different high-level goal (e.g., ‘pick up the apple and place it on the blue plate’, ‘open the drawer’, ‘wash the apple and place it on the blue plate’, and each episode is decomposed into necessary reasoning steps, with each step posed as a VQA question. After the agent is in front of the sink, and then predict theBounding Boxfor coarsely recognize the object, and then predict thePointfor interaction with it. Each high-level instruction (e.g., ‘wash the apple and place it on the blue plate’) is broken into a sequence of VQA-style reasoning steps, where each step maps explicitly to one of BEAR’s 14 atomic skills. Specifically, each ground truth annotation is first represented as a binary mask, from which the corresponding bounding box is subsequently computed. It integrates a hybrid vision encoder for efficient high-resolution image processing (1024×1024) and adopts a staged VL pretraining strategy that gradually balances textual and visual modalities. It is built on the Qwen2-7B architecture and uses OpenAI’s CLIP model as the vision encoder, enabling it to process both image and text inputs simultaneously. It features a strong visual encoder that supports high-resolution image understanding (up to 896×896) and a vision-language training paradigm optimized for both alignment and generation. It is trained from scratch with a unified vision-language pretraining paradigm. • GPT-o3(OpenAI, 2025b) represents the most advanced reasoning model in OpenAI’s o-series, designed for deep, step-by-step problem-solving across coding, math, science, and visual perception. Dissecting Embodied Abilities in Multimodal Language Models through Skill-level Evaluation and Diagnosis Figure 45.The reasoning process of GPT-4o onTrajectory Reasoning.The necessary reasoning step includes recognizing object location and then analyze the direction of trajectory arrows. Figure 46.The reasoning process of Gemini-2.0-Flash onTask Process Reasoning.The necessary reasoning step includes step-by-step analysis of the video and then checking the options. Dissecting Embodied Abilities in Multimodal Language Models through Skill-level Evaluation and Diagnosis Figure 48.CoT output of Gemini-2.5-Pro inBounding Box.The necessary reasoning step includes step-by-step analysis of object recognition and then normalization of coordinates. PERFORMANCE WITHTEST-TIMECOMPUTESCALING Due to the significant test-time compute required, we use BEAR-mini: During failure analysis, we explicitly adopt a chain-of-thought prompting strategy and instruct the model to generate its step-by-step reasoning process. Possible reasons include the lack of egocentric-aware supervision during training, which leads to incorrect spatial reasoning from a first-person perspective. To identify the red dot in the keyboard, which is typically a TrackPoint or pointing stick found in some laptops, let's analyze the image step by step:\n\n1. To identify the head of the monkey in the image and define the bounding box, let's follow a step-by-step approach:\n\n1. "To identify and locate the nearest plate, let's analyze the image step-by-step:\n\n1. None of above Missing