REAL METHOD of "Advancing Analytic Class-Incremental Learning through Vision-Language Calibration" (arXiv 2602.13670v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Advancing Analytic Class-Incremental Learning through Vision-Language Calibration Binyu Zhao 1 Wei Zhang 1 Xingrui Yu2 Zhaonian Zou 1 Ivor Tsang 2 3 Abstract Class-incremental learning (CIL) with pre-trained models (PTMs) faces a critical trade-off between efficient adaptation and long-term stability. In this paper, we first conduct a systematic study to dissect the failure modes of PTM-based analytic CIL, identifying representation rigidity as the primary bottleneck. Motivated by this in- sight, we proposeVILA, a novel dual-branch framework that advances analytic CIL via a two- level vision-language calibration strategy. Ideally, 1School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Insti- tute of Technology, China 2CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 3College of Com- puting and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Sin- gapore. 30% 65% 100% CIFAR ImageNet-R CUB UCF Aircraft Cars Food SUN APER-Adapter (IJCV'25) ENGINE (ICCV'25) LoRanPAC (ICLR'25) VILA 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 Log10 (Training time in minutes) 75.0 77.5 80.0 82.5 85.0 87.5 90.0 92.5 95.0Average Accuracy (%) APER-Adapter ENGINE LoRanPAC VILA VILA Avg: However, standard neural networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting when trained on shifting data distri- butions. While class-incremental learning (CIL) (Masana et al., 2022) aims to address this capability, achieving an optimal balance between stability (retaining old knowledge) and plasticity (learning new knowledge) remains a challeng- ing objective. Recent advancements have leveraged pre-trained models (PTMs) as a cornerstone strategy. However, the majority of PTM-based methods typically rely on iterative optimization of learnable parameters (e.g., via adapters or prompt tun- ing) (Wang et al., 2022b;a; Liang & Li, 2024; Roy et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a). Although these methods have improved CIL performance, they are often prone to performance degradation as the number of tasks accumulates, driven by the progressive perturbation of the representation space by gradient updates. Moreover, some of them can be cumbersome to execute, requiring intricate training procedures and meticulous hyperparameter tuning to seek a delicate equilibrium between stability and plas- ticity, which hinders their deployment in efficiency-critical scenarios. It aims to maintain high-level CIL performance by leveraging strong pre-trained features; Meanwhile, it alleviates the execution complexity and computational costs inherent to iterative methods. Based on this insight, we designVIsion-LanguageAnalytic learning (VILA), an asymmetric dual-branch framework to address the rigidity issue. As shown in Figure 1, VILA demonstrates leading perfor- mance across 8 benchmarks, consistently outperforming it- erative baselines with significantly higher training efficiency. Our investigation exposes representation rigidity as a key bottleneck, and highlights the general- ization constraints of single-branch architectures. • We propose VILA, which integrates analytic learning with a frozen VLM via geometric and semantic calibra- tion, effectively spanning a robust subspace to support continuous analytic updates. While foundational, these methods often struggle to balance scalability and performance in large-scale settings. PTM-based CIL.Traditional CIL methodologies were pre- dominantly centered on training models from scratch. Despite their effectiveness, these iterative methods incur significant latency due to back-propagation. All fine-tuning modules are trained solely on the first task (D1) and subsequently frozen. This suggests that the bottleneck architecture better preserves the backbone’s pre-trained topology while offering sufficient plasticity. Unified geometric calibration (UGC) Our first objective is to coherently merge the two branches into a unified feature vector F. We train the ViT-Adapter on the first task using the AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01, decaying via a cosine annealing sched- ule. Unlike gradient-based methods that suffer from under-fitting due to insufficient updates, VILA’s recursive analytic solver 101 102 Average Training Time (min, log scale) 101 Average Inference Time (min, log scale) L2PDualPrompt CODA-PromptAPER-Adapter TUNA SD-LoRA CL-LoRA ENGINE RanPAC LoRanPAC VILA VILA (Ours) SOTA Baselines Other Methods Pareto Frontier High Efficiency Zone Figure 4.Comparison of total training vs. Limitations and Future Work.Despite these advances, three limitations remain for future exploration.First, the dual-branch architecture inherently doubles the inference parameter count. By achieving order-of- magnitude faster training speeds and lower memory foot- prints compared to existing methods, VILA promotes the principles ofGreen AI, facilitating the deployment of intel- ligent systems on resource-constrained edge devices with reduced carbon emissions. Last layer re-training is sufficient for robustness to spurious corre- lations. In2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. STEP2:LINKING THE RESIDUAL TO DISTRIBUTION DISTANCE During the training on Task 1, maximizing the likelihood is equivalent to aligning the feature subspace S1 with the principal components of the Task 1 distribution. CONCLUSION Combining Step 1 and Step 2, we theoretically justify the geometric intuition inRemark 3.1: VILA Algorithm The algorithmic workflow of VILA consists of two primary phases: thelearning phase(Algorithm 1), which constructs the model parameters, and theinference phase(Algorithm 2), which executes prediction. As shown in Algorithm 1, thelearning phaseintegrates gradient-based optimization with analytic recursive updates.Lines 14 Advancing Analytic Class-Incremental Learning through Vision-Language Calibration Algorithm 3Offline semantic caching (Preparation in training phase) inputNovel class setC t for the incoming taskt; Text Encoderf txt CLIP ; Current cache memoryM txt. 1:Extract calibrated featureFand compute primary logitsˆy AL (via Algorithm 2, Lines 1-3). 2:K ←TopK(ˆyAL, K)▷Select top-K candidate indices 3:foreach classc∈ Kdo 4:Retrieve prototype:F c T XT← Mtxt[c]▷O(1) offline table look-up 5:Compute refinement scoreˆy CLIP via Eq. The model is trained solely on the first task D1 via standard SGD. To mitigate the rigidity of the fixed backbone, the Candidate Semantic Enhancement (CSE) module selects the Top-K probable classes and comput