REAL METHOD of "Scaling Continual Learning to 300+ Tasks with Bi-Level Routing Mixture-of-Experts" (arXiv 2602.03473v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

a router selection stage that dynami- cally activates relevant task-specific routers, fol- lowed by an expert routing phase that dynamically activates and aggregates experts, aiming to inject discriminative and comprehensive representations into every intermediate network layer. Our method outperforms other baselines by a large margin across a variety of settings. Such a local decision strategy injects customized knowledge retrieval capabilities into every network layer. Although the ImageNet dataset appears to be an option, it is not ideal for evaluating PTM-based CIL methods, which typically utilize weights pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset, leading to biased re- sults. In the first stage, an input feature is fed into every task-specific class percep- 2 Scaling Continual Learning to 300+ Tasks with Bi-Level Routing Mixture-of-Experts tron to produce semantic guidance, which is then used to select Top-Mtask-specific router networks. To address the absence of a suitable benchmark for evalu- ating CIL methods on long task sequences, we introduce a challenging dataset named OmniBenchmark-1K, curated from the OmniBenchmark-V2 dataset (Zhang et al., 2022). At 151 tasks, our method outperforms MIN (Jiang et al., 2025) by 8.68% in AB. First, our CaRE enhances the dynamic modeling capacity of every network layer, encapsulating powerful feature representations into the continual learner. For instance, MoE-Adapter (Yu et al., 2024) trains a dedicated router along with a set of experts for each task on top of a pre-trained vision-language model (Radford et al., 2021). In contrast, our BR-MoE introduces a bi- level routing mechanism with more comprehensive relevant knowledge retrieval and aggregation at every network layer, demonstrating robust performance. In this work, the model f t is built upon a PTM, and defined as f t(x) =W t ⊤ϕt(x), where ϕt :X →R d is a feature encoder consisting of a frozen PTM and parameter-efficient modules learned up to task t. Overall Architecture As illustrated in Figure 2 (a), the proposed CaRE is built upon a pre-trained ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). During incremental train- ing, only the components and parameters of the BR-MoE modules are updated to learn new tasks. Bi-Level Routing Mixture-of-Experts Overview.Every BR-MoE module contains a set of triplet components, {(Ct,R t,E t)}T t=1, where Ct is a class per- ceptron, Rt is a router network, and Et is an expert. A router network Rt associated with task t comprises a linear layer, ηt ∈R d×t, followed by a softmax operation. Class perceptrons performdynamic router selectionby de- ciding which Top-M router networks are most appropriate for the current input. A BR-MoE module dynamically aggregates relevant knowl- edge from learned tasks through a bi-level process, which first selects multiple most related routers, each of which then activates multiple complementary experts, while a shared expert with consolidated knowledge from all tasks further enriches the feature representation. The core mechanism involves dynamically inferring the most probable task identities and their associated routers in every network layer for a given input sample. During train- ing, the router network corresponding to the latest task (RT) is always activated, while the remaining M−1 routers are selected dynamically according to their entropy values (Fig- ure 2 (b)). To focus on the most relevant knowledge, for each selected router, we only activate the Top-Kexperts with the largest gating scores, which are re-normalized through the softmax operator. However, com- pared to final-layer representations, features at intermediate or shallow layers are typically less discriminative because high-level semantic abstractions may not have sufficiently developed. To learn more robust semantic guidance, we introduce a KL divergence loss Lℓ KL between st ∈R |Gt| and final-layer softmax probabilities pt ∈R |Gt| for task t, aiming to mimic high-level representations directly. The final loss for the class perceptron at theℓ-th layer is: Lℓ cp =L ℓ cls +L ℓ KL (8) For training stability, we averageLℓ cp across all L layers and scale it by a factor λ (set to 1 by default), which is then combined with the main classification loss in Equation 2 to form the overall training objective of CaRE: This endows every BR-MoE module to develop a local decision-making ability based on the semantic abstraction at its own layer, enabling customized knowledge retrieval. To make the representation discriminative among a wider collection of classes, our method activates multiple top-ranked routers, which pro- duce complementary features that make the representation more comprehensive. At the router level, the dynamic selection of historical routers (besides the current one) ensures that the representations learned for the new task are compatible with the learned gating patterns of related past routers. Specifically, for the training set, we first collect all candidate classes containing at least 100 images per realm, then randomly select an approximately equal number of classes from each realm (using a fixed random seed of 1993) to form the dataset. Note that some of these methods cannot be seamlessly scaled to our long-sequence evaluation scenarios due to either implemen- tation incompatibilities, training instability (e.g., training collapse when task number increases significantly), or pro- hibitive computational demands. Method ¯A A B Baseline 78.54 68.27 w/o Dynamics 68.85 (-9.69) 58.29(-9.98) Autoencoder 74.29 (-4.25) 64.35(-3.92) Cosine Head 75.88 (-2.66) 65.91(-2.36) Max Logits 74.75 (-3.79) 65.21(-3.06) Table 5.Ablation study on MoE architecture. At first, we remove all class perceptrons and utilize a prototype classifier to determine the task identity (Zhou et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025b), thereby activating corresponding router networks at each layer. First, instead of instanti- ating a new task-specific router for each arriving task, we employ a channel-expansion router (Wang et al., 2025a) that enlarges the channel dimension of a single shared router for every new task, while removing all class perceptrons. Overall, these results collectively demonstrate the importance of the MoE architecture in our method. Router and expert activation patterns.We further analyze task-related routing by measuring the recall of activated routers and experts across layers and task scales. Effect of the local decision scope.To assess the efficacy of layer-wise local