REAL METHOD of "RoCA: Robust Cross-Domain End-to-End Autonomous Driving" (arXiv 2506.10145v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Although several works have incorporated Large Language Models (LLMs) to leverage their open-world knowledge, LLMs do not guarantee cross-domain driving per- formance and may incur prohibitive retraining costs during domain adaptation. In this paper, we propose RoCA, a novel framework for robust cross-domain E2E autonomous driving. RoCA formulates the joint probabilistic distribution over the tokens that encode ego and surrounding vehi- cle information in the E2E pipeline. Then, given any driving scene, it is able to probabilistically in- fer the future trajectory. By using RoCA together with a base E2E model in source-domain training, we improve the generalizability of the base model, without requiring extra inference computation. An im- portant factor is the lack of diversity in existing large-scale training datasetse.g.,[Dosovitskiy et al., 2017; Caesar et al., 2020; Ettinger et al., 2021], which often fail to capture the full spectrum of driving scenarios. This imbalance is further amplified by standard training protocols, which tend to prioritize performance on frequent scenarios, causing the optimization to under-weigh long-tail events. This vari- ance can be used to dynamically weight the training loss, enabling RoCA to automatically assign greater importance to uncertain or difficult predictions, thereby effectively ad- dressing the training imbalance towards common scenarios and improving performance on critical long-tail events. By using a set of basis tokens trained to span diverse driving scenarios, RoCA module probabilistically infers a trajectory for the current input scene. Given a sequence of multi-view images It, along with the ego status information (that includes pose, velocity, acceleration), the objective of RoCA is to jointly predict: The RoCA module instantiates this GP-based formulation as g(·;θ g, κ), where κ(·) is the kernel function and θg repre- sents the learnable parameters.1 Base E2E model.The scene encoder extracts features from the input multi-camera images and cross-attends learnable queries/tokens with these features. Specifically, the scene encoder produces ego tokens e, and agent tokens a (among other possible tokens), which encode key information for the ego vehicle and of the other surrounding vehicles. Following [Sun et al., 2025], we use an anchor-based method to predict trajectories in both the base motion plan- ner and RoCA module. RoCA Module In this part, we discuss our proposed RoCA module in de- tails. To construct this set of basis trajectories, we first sampleNcode · C representative trajectories from ground-truth train data, e.g.,nuScenes [Caesar et al., 2020]. With these basis tokens and trajectories, given a new driving sce- nario encoded by e and a, we can infer the ego and agent trajectories based on the correlation between the ego/agent tokens and the basis tokens. In order to train them, we derive the first set of losses via reconstruction of the original ego and agent tokens given by the base model from the basis tokens. Given a driving scenario with ego and agent tokens from the base model, e and a, we first classify them into the respec- tive basis groups. TRAINING INSOURCEDOMAIN Pre-training base E2E model.First, we train the base E2E model on the source domain data following standard training procedure,e.g.,[Jiang et al., 2023; Li & Cui, 2025; Sun et al., 2025]. Finetuning base E2E model.Finally, given the trained RoCA module, we utilize it to perform regularized finetun- ing. More specifically, in addition to the standard supervised loss used to train the base model, we additionally use the following loss by treating RoCA as a teacher: This loss en- courages the base model’s prediction to align with the prob- abilistic prediction by the trained Gaussian process, which improves prediction robustness and regularizes against noise in training data. In such cases, model adaptation is then the same as the final step in source- domain training, where the standard ground-truth supervi- sion on planning in Eq. To assess open-loop planning, we use the nuScenes dataset [Caesar et al., 2020], which consists of 28,000 sam- ples with 22k/6k training/validation splits. The base E2E model, state-of-the-art baselines, and the pro- posed RoCA module are first trained on the source do- main (Bench2Drive) for 12 epochs. Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. When using the trained Gaussian process module in RoCA to predict trajectory, we achieve further improved planning performance, for both base models of V AD-Tiny and SparseDrive-S, reducing the collision rate by 54% and 36%, respectively. RoCA Training details for this experiment We trained RoCA using 2 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. As described in Section 3.3 of main paper, in the source domain, we first train the base E2E model following standard supervised procedure, for 48 epochs, requiring approximately 24 hours. Then, we train the Gaussian process in RoCA for 6 epochs, taking approximately 3 hours, to learn the basis tokens, based on the loss in Eqs. Algorithm 1 provides the pseudo code of our source-domain training (showing 1 epoch for each step). Algorithm 2 provides the pseudo code of our target-domain unsupervised adaptation (showing 1 epoch for each step) 14 RoCA: Robust Cross-Domain End-to-End Autonomous Driving Algorithm 1RoCA source-domain training 1:Training samples in source domain:D s ={S s 1, . , Ss N } 2:In base E2E model, tokenizerst(.)with parametersθ st and plannerh(.)with parametersθ h 3:In RoCA module, Gaussian processg(.)with parametersθ g, basis token codebookB={B k ={b j,k}C j=1}Ncode k=1 , and trajectory codebookW={W k ={w j,k}C j=1}Ncode k=1 #Step 1: Learn basis tokens and RoCA parameters 10:forS s i ∈ Ds do 11:Keepθ st, θh frozen 12:Calculate group labelsc e andc a for ego and agent tokens, respectively, based on Section 3.2.2 13:Calculate reconstructed ego and agent tokens as well as the predictive variances:ˆ e,σ 2 e,ˆ a,σ2 a, according to Eq 3 14:Compute lossL rec based on Eq. 6 17:UpdateBandθ g using lossesL rec andL sup 18:end for #Step 3: Lplan(ppred,p GT ) and Lmot(ppred,a,p GT,a ), as in [Sun et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2023] 22:Compute lossL gp based on Eq. 7 23:Updateθ st andθ h using both the standard trajectory losses andL gp 24:end for Algorithm 2RoCA target-domain unsupervised adaptation 1:Training samples in source domain:D T ={S T 1 , . , ST N } 2:In base E2E model, tokenizerst(.)with paramet