REAL METHOD of "Manifold-Aligned Guided Integrated Gradients for Reliable Feature Attribution" (arXiv 2605.02167v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address this limitation, we proposeManifold- Aligned Guided Integrated Gradients(MA-GIG), which constructs attribution paths in the latent space of a pre-trained variational autoencoder. Consequently, our method reduces off- manifold noise and outperforms prior path-based attribution methods across multiple datasets and classifiers. Among many approaches, path-based methods (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Jha et al., 2020; Kapishnikov et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2021; Zaher et al., 2024; Zhuo & Ge, 2024) are particularly attractive because they connect attributions to principled requirements such as completeness and sensitivity (Sun- dararajan et al., 2017). As a result, these methods have become a standard approach for interpreting modern neural networks and for building explanation-based diagnostics. Integrated Gradients (IG) (Sundararajan et al., 2017) is a canonical path-based attribution method that computes fea- ture contributions by integrating input gradients along a path from a baseline to the input. In this paper, we proposeManifold-Aligned Guided In- tegrated Gradients(MA-GIG), a path-based attribution method that constructs guided integration paths in the la- tent space of a pre-trained variational autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Higgins et al., 2017). Path Methods Path-based attribution methods define feature importance by accumulating gradients along a continuous curve γ: We first formally characterize the manifold deviation problem inherent to pixel-space guidance, then show how latent-space path con- struction mitigates it through the geometric properties of the decoder mapping. At step k, with the current posi- tion x(k), the algorithm identifies a subset of features S(k) possessing low local gradient magnitudes: If the step size is sufficiently small (∥∆x(k)∥ ≤τ /2) and the orthogonal component is dominant such that ∥∆x(k) ⊥ ∥> 1 τ ∥∆x(k)∥2, then the updated point strictly leaves the manifold: Manifold Alignment via Latent Guidance To resolve the manifold deviation problem identified in Proposition 3.1, we propose constructing the guidance path Algorithm 1 Manifold-Aligned Guided IG 1: Input:Image x, baseline x′, classifier f, encoder E, decoder D, steps K, selection fraction q, step size η∈ (0,1] 2:Output:Attribution mapA 3:// encode to latent space 4:z←E(x),z ′ ←E(x ′) 5:z (0) ←z ′ 6:fork= 0, . We first compute the gradient of the model output with respect to the latent features via the decoder’s Jacobian: The complete pseudocode for this procedure is provided in Algorithm 1. Practical Remark on Imperfect Generators.While our analysis relies on thePerfect Autoencoderassumption, in practice, we find that well-trained imperfect V AEs , such as those in Latent Diffusion Models (Rombach et al., 2022), still provide useful generative priors for latent guidance. All models are initialized with ImageNet-pretrained weights, with those evaluated on the Oxford datasets subsequently fine-tuned on their respec- tive training splits following standard protocols. Notably, our method achieves superior faithfulness scores in terms of DiffID and Inser- tion metrics on Oxford-IIIT Pet, Oxford 102 Flower, and ImageNet datasets. This stability demonstrates that our method is robust to hyperparameter choices, con- sistently delivering reliable attributions without requiring careful tuning of the selection fraction. Notably, the V AE from MAR, which is pre-trained specifically on ImageNet, often matches or exceeds the per- formance of V AEs from larger models such as SD2, despite the latter being trained on the significantly larger LAION- 5B dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022). However, both methods remain largely agnostic to 7 Manifold-Aligned Guided Integrated Gradients for Reliable Feature Attribution Table 1.Performance comparison of attribution methods among classifiers across datasets.Bestand second-best results are highlighted. On ImageNet insertion, MA-GIG remains below methods such as Grad- CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017), I-GOS, and iGOS++ (Qi et al., 2020; Khorram et al., 2021), which rely on final- layer localization or explicitly optimize masks for the in- sertion objective. E, DPre-trained encoderE:X → Zand smooth decoderD:Z → X. g(k) Latent gradient vector at stepk, computed via the chain rule through the decoder. If the step size is sufficiently small ( ∥∆x(k)∥ ≤τ /2) and the orthogonal component is dominant such that∥∆x (k) ⊥ ∥> 1 τ ∥∆x(k)∥2, then the updated point strictly leaves the manifold: Under the idealized autoencoder assumption, this path satisfies the standard axiomatic properties of path methods (Sun- dararajan et al., 2017). • ImageNet2012.We evaluate our method on the first 500 images from the official validation set, which contains 50,000 images across 1,000 classes. Pre-Trained V AE Backbones for Data Manifold We employ four pre-trained generative models to validate our method across different latent manifold structures. Generative Backbones.We employ the autoencoder components from four pre-trained generative models to validate our method across different latent manifold structures. Specifically, we compare the V AE from a model trained on ImageNet with V AEs from text-to-image models trained on large-scale LAION datasets (SD1, SD2, KD). It utilizes a fixed CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder and a KL-regularized autoencoder with a downsampling factor of 8 (mapping inputs to 4-channel latents). An improved version of the latent diffusion model framework (Rombach et al., 2022) trained on subsets of LAION-5B with a larger text encoder (OpenCLIP-ViT/H). Comparing SD1 and SD2 allows us to analyze sensitivity within the same architectural family but under different training objectives and text embedding spaces. We use 200 integration steps with a feature selection fraction of 0.1 (10% of features updated per step) and a zero baseline. We use 201 steps with a step size of 0.02. We use 200 integration steps with a feature selection fraction of 0.05 (5% of latent features updated per step) and a zero baseline. First, we investigate the sensitivity of our method to key hyperparameters, including the feature selection fraction and the choice of V AE backbones. We evaluate the performance on three different backbones—ResNet18, VGG16, and InceptionV1—to verify the generalization capability of our method. For instance, on the Oxford-IIIT Pet dataset with VGG16, our method improves the DiffID score by a large margin compared to the strongest baseline. First, regardin