REAL METHOD of "Predicting Large Model Test Losses with a Noisy Quadratic System" (arXiv 2605.09154v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Maddison 1 2 Abstract We introduce a predictive model that estimates the pre-training loss of large models from model size (N), batch size (B) and number of weight updates (K). The model out- performs Chinchilla’s loss model, a model of the test loss using the batch size and number of tokens, in terms of projecting the loss at extrapolated com- pute budgets (up to 1000 folds). Introduction During the late 2010s, deep learning researchers observed that the cross-entropy loss of large models (LMs) follows a power law in terms of the amount of pre-training compute (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020), launching the research area of neural scaling laws. One approach, pioneered by the widely applied Chinchilla scaling study (Hoffmann et al., 2022), made use of a simple loss model that estimates test loss with model size (N) and dataset size (D), which is then used as a surrogate to LM pre- training to find the optimal N, D. In this paper, we introduce a loss model family that main- tains the conceptual clarity of a Chinchilla-style loss model, but is more easily extended towards multiple pre-training variables on account of being mechanistic. Specifically, we introduce a predictive loss model that ex- presses the test loss as a function of N, B, K, and we name it the Noisy Quadratic System (NQS). Using GPUs, 1 arXiv:2605.09154v1 [cs.LG] 9 May 2026 Predicting Large Model Test Losses with a Noisy Quadratic System Figure 1.The Noisy Quadratic System (NQS) predicted LLM test losses on holdout data, outperforming Chinchilla’s loss model. NQS successfully predicted the loss of LLMs over variations of model size N, holding constant the total FLOPs budget, at compute budgets up to 1000 times higher than its train- ing data.Bottom: In our experiments, the NQS loss model was also better at loss prediction than Chinchilla method 3 (Fig.1). How Good Is Chinchilla as a Predictive Model of Large Model Test Loss? Chinchilla method 3 is the quintessential loss model for LLMs. It gives an estimate of the pre-training test loss as a function of the number of parameters in the LLM ( N) and the number of tokens used to train the LLM (D). The intended use case of the Chinchilla loss model is to select an N/D ratio, and its loss estimation formula is used to identify a pair of N, Dthat minimizes pre-training loss, holding constant the total compute budgetC≈6N D. Chinchilla Method 3, Pre-Train Test Loss Model LCHIN θ (N, D) =Eirr + P N p−1 + Q Dp/q−1/q ,(1) D=B×K×seq. A series of LLMs from a particular architecture family were run, so as to obtain a dataset of the form D= {(Ni, Di, Li)}m i=1 where Li is the test loss of a model of sizeN i trained onD i number of tokens. How well does Chinchilla perform as a predictive loss model?For a loss model to be useful for scaling tasks, it is essential that the model can predict the loss of more compute intensive LLM runs based on information from smaller LLM runs. We fit the model on a low-compute “Train” subset and tested it on a high-compute “Holdout”, leaving a compute gap of 50× between the largest Holdout FLOP budget and the largest Train FLOP budget. As the compute gap between the training and holdout dataset increased, the deficiency of Chinchilla as a loss prediction model became more dramatic (Fig.6 in App.B). The Noisy Quadratic Model Expected Risk.The NQM models the training dy- namics of NN test losses as the expected risk of stochastic optimization on a quadratic loss surface: The Effect of LayerNorm LayerNorm and other normalization techniques have a large effect on training dynamics (van Laarhoven, 2017; Li et al., 2020; Hoffer et al., 2019). LayerNorm and the Effective Learning Rate In deep learning models trained with LayerNorm, the Effective Learning Rate isγ eff ∝ 1 ||w||2 . Then we add in the effect of LayerNorm so that the NQS can model small batch training (inspiration 3.3). The ablation study in Fig.3 showed that the vanilla NQS (5) is already a good predictive model for large batch training, 5 Predicting Large Model Test Losses with a Noisy Quadratic System Figure 3.Accounting for the effect of LayerNorm by setting the learning rate γ∝ 1 ||w||2 helps NQS fit large models trained with small batch sizes. A series of large models from a particular architecture family were run, so as to obtain a dataset of the form D={(N i, Bi, Ki, li)}m i=1 where li is the test loss of a model of size Ni trained with mini-batch size Bi for Ki number of weight updates. NQS is Fast to Compute and Train Luckily, equation (5) can be computed efficiently. The x-axis represents gradually removing data points from the training set, starting from those training points with the highest compute budgets, so as to increase the compute gap between the training set and the holdout set. (b) NQS succeeded until the largest training run is reduced to 1/4000 of the largest test run in compute (beyond which point only two IsoFLOPs slices remain in the training set). NQS train loss and test loss stayed close until that point. We trained LLMs on OpenWebText2 (Gokaslan 5Please see the appendix for definitions of the model family 6 Predicting Large Model Test Losses with a Noisy Quadratic System Table 1.NQS predicts LLM loss on held-out data, outperform- ing Chinchilla. Training/Holdout Split.We maintain a compute gap be- tween DTrain and DTest. The compute budget for the largest LLM in the training set is 6e16, and the compute budgets for the LLMs in the holdout set are between 2e17 and 6e19. Predictive Performance.In Tab.1, we demonstrate the performance of NQS in loss prediction over two test sets, one covering variations across model sizes, and the other across batch sizes, both at extrapolated compute scales; NQS successfully generalized to higher compute budgets in both settings and outperformed the Chinchilla loss model. Simply compute the NQS on a grid of N, B, Kwithin the constrained set, and select the point with the lowest NQS predicted loss. An example of such compound constraints is a compute- time constraint of (c, t), which defines the constrained set Sc,t ={(N, B, K) : Namely, we set a constraint over compute (C= 6×N BK×seq.len ) and an additional constraint over one of the resources from below: Time and memory can be computed more precisely from the architecture, training procedure, hardware and (N, B, K), but these crude approximations are sufficient to demonstrate the generality of the types of constraints the NQS can work with. Discussions We introduced N