REAL METHOD of "MotionMAR: Multi-scale Auto-Regressive Human Motion Reconstruction from Sparse Observations" (arXiv 2606.23000v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Inspired by the success of multi-level autoregressive models in computer vision, we propose MotionMAR, a coarse-to-fine framework for motion reconstruc- tion from sparse observations. It first estimates the global trajectory of human motion and then gradually refines the temporal details. The Temporal Multi-scale Tokenization (TMT) VQ-V AE encodes the data at multiple tempo- ral resolutions, separating semantic motion from minor jitters. It first establishes the global structure through coarse indices and then generates finer indices to recover specific de- tails. Meanwhile, the Scale-Aware Control (SAC) module integrates sparse tracking data to ensure the generated output aligns with actual observa- tions. However, traditional modeling methods, including many transformer-based approaches, often overlook this natural characteristic. Meanwhile, methods such as PoseGPT (Lucas et al., 2022), MotionGPT (Jiang et al., 2023), and T2M-GPT (Zhang et al., 2023) leverage VQ- V AE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) to encode human motion into a discrete latent space and perform autoregressive pre- diction of latent tokens within this space, enabling more structured and coherent motion generation. As far as we know, MotionMAR is the first approach adapting a multi- scale autoregressive method for motion reconstruction from sparse observations. Methodology Overview To address the highly ambiguous nature of sparse motion reconstruction, we introduce MotionMAR, a multi-scale autoregressive framework. Both hk and the codebook embeddings are then L2-normalized, enabling the retrieval of the nearest codebook vectors, denoted as qk, based on cosine similar- ity. Finally, the encoder, decoder, and hierarchical quantizer are optimized jointly with the following losses. In addition, λi, i∈[1,4] represents the weight parameters for each loss. Supplying the network with ground-truth outputs instead of its own previous predictions allows it to learn more reliable mappings across layers without accumulating errors.To optimize the network, we apply a cross-entropy loss between the predicted indices ˆqk and the ground-truth indices qgt k at each scale, which are extracted by passing real human motion through the VQ-V AE. By applying global average pooling to the encoded features, we generate a static context vector that modulates the Adap- tive Layer Normalization (AdaLN) parameters across all transformer blocks throughout the generation process. Operating directly on the continuous pose sequence, this re- finement module is built as a multi-layer Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit (Bi-GRU). In the first setting (S1), we combine the CMU (University), BMLrub (Troje, 2010), and HDM05 (M ¨uller et al., 2007) datasets, randomly splitting them into 90% for training and 10% for testing. Quantitative and Qualitative Results To validate the effectiveness of our approach, we bench- mark it against representative methods from various paradigms. As shown in Table 1, our method outperforms existing ap- proaches on most evaluation metrics, demonstrating the effectiveness of our MotionMAR framework. First, tradi- tional optimization-based methods like Final IK and MLP- based approaches like LoBSTr exhibit a significant perfor- mance gap compared to the other four categories. In contrast, our method, Motion- MAR, achieves highly competitive results in capturing both structural human pose and coherent full-body motion. The results from the comparative experiments show that our method achieves a high degree of consistency with the ground truth (GT). As shown in Fig- ure 4, our method exhibits superior alignment with the Ground Truth, particularly in the hand and leg regions. Ablation Study To validate the contribution of each core component to hu- man motion reconstruction performance in our method, we conducted a systematic ablation study. Table 4 presents the evaluation results on the AMASS dataset under setting S1 for different combinations of key modules, including Motion Refinement Network (MRN), Scale-aware Control Module (SAC), and Temporal Multi-scale Tokenization (TMT). Method Params FLOPs FPS AvatarJLM 63.81M 0.52G 12.91 AvatarPoser 4.12M 0.33G 12.40 AGRoL 7.48M 1.00G 54.64 SAGE 137.35M 4.11G 13.81 RPM 9.89M 0.09G 233 MotionMAR (Ours)42.36M 1.47G 61.76 We further evaluate the computational efficiency of Mo- tionMAR against state-of-the-art methods in Table 5. As a result, our method can still fail in rare motions or highly ambiguous cases where stronger physics-based priors may be required. Our temporal-only design encodes temporal topology holistically, bounding total self-attention cost across three scales ( T /4, T /2, T) to 21 16 T 2d. To further verify the importance of discrete representations, we design an additional variant, MotionMAR (Continuous), by replacing the VQ-V AE in MotionMAR with a continuous autoencoder. Under this setting, the autoregressive network no longer predicts discrete token indices with a cross-entropy objective; instead, it directly regresses continuous latent vectors using an MSE loss. Temporal Multi-scale VQ-V AE Algorithm 1 first encodes the input motion into H, and then performs multi-scale quantization to obtain tokens at different temporal resolutions R(tk). To ensure training stability and preserve the initial structural integrity, we initialize the weights of the final linear projection layer with a near-zero gain (set to 0.01). Multi-scale Auto-Regressive Human Motion Reconstruction from Sparse Observations Algorithm 1Temporal Multi-scale VQ-V AE Encoding Require:Human motion poseθ; 1:Hyperparameters:stepsK, resolutions(t k)K k=1; 2:H=E(θ), R= [ ]; 3:fork= 1, . , Kdo 4:q k =Q k(interpolate(H, tk)); 5:R=queue push(R, qk); 6:z k =lookup(Z, qk); 7:z k =interpolate(z k, tk); 8:H=H−ϕ k(zk); 9:end for 10:Returnmulti-scale tokensR; Algorithm 2Temporal Multi-scale VQ-V AE Decoding Require:multi-scale tokensR, Sparse observationsX t; 1:Hyperparameters:stepsK, resolutions(t k)K k=1; 2:Z= 0; 3:fork= 1, . ˆθ=D(Concat(Z, X ′ )); 11:Returnreconstructed human motion ˆθ; guide the Motion Refinement Network in generating physically plausible and geometrically accurate motions, we impose two specific constraints during training: To ensure high-fidelity pose reconstruction, we compute the loss in the interpretable axis-angle space rather than the latent 6D space. To examine this design choice, we conduct an additional ablation by replacing the loss in Equation (9) with an SO(3) geodesic-distance lo