REAL METHOD of "Generalization Bounds for Out-of-distribution Generalization" (arXiv 2208.07798v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Counterfactual Supervision-based Information Bottleneck for Out-of-Distribution Generalization Bin Deng and Kui Jia South China University of Technology eebindeng@mail.scut.edu.cn 29 Nov 2022 Abstract Learning invariant (causal) features for out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization has attracted extensive attention recently, and among the proposals invariant risk minimization (IRM) is a notable solution. First, we show that the key assumption of support overlap of invariant features used in IB-IRM is strong for the guarantee of OOD generalization and it is still possible to achieve the optimal solution without this assumption. Second, we illustrate two failure modes that IB-IRM (and IRM) could fail for learning the invariant features, and to address such failures, we propose aCounterfactual Supervision-based Information Bottleneck (CSIB) learning algorithm that provably recovers the invariant features. 1 Introduction Modern machine learning models are prone to catastrophic performance loss during deployment when the test distribution is diﬀerent from the training distribution. [1] ﬁrst show that for OOD generalization, linear classiﬁcation is more diﬃcult (see Theorem 1), and propose a new learning method of information bottleneck-based invariant risk minimization (IB-IRM) based on the support overlap assumption (Assumption 7). Then, 1 arXiv:2208.07798v3 [cs.LG] 16 Jan 2023 we examine whether the IB-IRM proposed in [1] is suﬃcient to learn invariant features for linear classiﬁcation, and ﬁnd that IB-IRM (and IRM) could fail in two modes. We then analyze two failure modes of IB-IRM and IRM, in particular when the spurious features in training environments capture suﬃcient information for the task of interest but have less information than the invariant features. Based on the above analyses, we propose a new method, termed counterfactual supervision-based information bottleneck (CSIB), to address such failures. Finally, we design three synthetic datasets and a colored minst dataset based on our used motivating examples; experiments demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of CSIB empirically. Based on the above analysis, our method is then proposed in Section 5. Let D ={De}e∈Etr be the training data gathered from a set of training environmentsEtr⊂E all, where De ={(xe i,y e i )}ne i=1 is the dataset from environmente with each instance(xe i,y e i ) i.i.d. We say an algorithm succeeds to solve OOD generalization with respect to (Etr,Eood) if the predictorf∗∈F returned by this algorithm satisﬁes the following equation: It is worth to note that although the DAGs are identical across all training environments in each mode of Assumptions 4, 5, and 6, the interventional SEMsCe ood among diﬀerent training environments are diﬀerent due to the interventions on the exogenous noise variables. If for all the training environmentsEtr, the latent invariant features are bounded and strictly separable, i.e., Assumptions 2 and 3 hold, then every deterministic algorithm fails to solve the OOD generalization. Then, by applying any algorithm to solve the above example withrth = q, we would get a predictor off∗ = w∗◦ Φ∗. (10) It is trivial to show that thef∗ of Φ∗ inv = 0 and Φ∗ spu = 1 is an invariant predictor across training environments with classiﬁcation errorRe1 =Re2 =q, and it achieves the least entropy ofhe(Φ∗) = 0 for each training environmente, and therefore, it is a solution of IB-IRM and IRM. Then, by applying any algorithm to solve the above example withrth = q, we would get a predictor off∗ = w∗◦ Φ∗. (11) It is trivial to show that thef∗ of Φ∗ inv = 0 and Φ∗ spu = 1 is an invariant predictor across training environments with classiﬁcation errorRe1 =Re2 = 0, and it achieves the least entropy ofhe(Φ∗) = 1 among all highly predictive predictors for each training environmente, and therefore, it is a solution of IB-IRM and IRM. 4.3 Understanding the failures From the illustrations of above simple examples, we can conclude that the failure of invariance constraint for removing the spurious features out is because the spurious features among all training environments are strictly linearly separable by their corresponding labels. This would make the predictor relying only on spurious features to achieve minimum training error and also be the invariant predictor across training environments. Given anyEtr⊂E all andEood⊆E all satisfying Assumptions 2, 3, and 7, if two sets ∪e∈EtrZ e spu(Y e = 1) and∪e∈EtrZ e spu(Y e = 0) are linearly separable andH(Z e inv)>H (Z e spu) on each training environmente, then IB-IRM (and IRM, ERM, or IB-ERM) with anyrth∈ R fails to solve the OOD generalization. The understanding of Theorem 2 is intuitive since when the spurious features in the training environments with respect to diﬀerent labels are linearly separable, there is no algorithm that can distinguish spurious features from invariant features. The learning algorithm of CSIB is illustrated in Algorithm 1, and Figure 3 shows the framework of CSIB. Given anyEtr⊂E all andEood⊆E all satisfying Assumptions 2, 3, and 8, then for every Spurious correlations of Assumptions 4, 52, and 6, CSIB algorithm withrth =q 2In this correlation mode, assume the spurious features are linearly separable in the training environments 7 Algorithm 1Counterfactual Supervision-based Information Bottleneck (CSIB) Input: 6 Experiments 6.1 Toy experiments on synthetic datasets We begin perform experiments on three synthetic datasets from diﬀerent spurious correlations modes to verify our method – counterfactual supervision-based information bottleneck (CSIB) – and compare it to ERM, IB-ERM, IRM, and IB-IRM. 6.1.2 Summary of results Table 2 shows the classiﬁcation errors of diﬀerent methods when training data comes from single, three, and six environments. Our method CSIB shows consistent results with IB-IRM in Example 1/1S when invariant features are extracted in the ﬁrst run, which veriﬁes the eﬀectiveness of using information bottleneck for OOD generalization. Methods ERM IRM IB-ERM IB-IRM CSIB Oracle Accuracy 9.94 ± 0.28 20.39 ± 2.76 9.94 ± 0.28 43.84 ± 12.48 60.03± 1.28 84.72± 0.65 method IB-ERM would degrade the performance of ERM by focusing more on the spurious features. In the third experiments of Example 3/3S, we can see that although ERM shows not-bad results due to the signiﬁcantly larger margin of invariant features, our method CSIB still shows improvements by removing out more spurious features. Notably, comparing to the IB-ERM and IB-IRM