REAL METHOD of "Gradients with Respect to Semantics Preserving Embeddings Tell the Uncertainty of Large Language Model" (arXiv 2605.04638v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

In this work, we propose the first gradient-based UQ method for free-form generation, SemGrad, which is sampling-free and computationally ef- ficient. Unlike prior gradient-based methods de- veloped for classification tasks that operates in parameter space, we propose to consider gradi- ents in semantic space. Our method builds on the key intuition that a confident LLM should main- tain stable output distributions under semantically equivalent input perturbations. We interpret the stability as the gradients in semantic space and introduce a Semantic Preservation Score (SPS) to identify embeddings that best capture semantics, with respect to which gradients are computed. Experiments demonstrate that both of our meth- ods provide efficient and effective uncertainty esti- mates, achieving superior performance than state- of-the-art methods, particularly in settings with multiple valid responses. Unlike standard classification, where the label space is fixed and relatively constrained, LLMs operate in a sequential classification framework with an extremely large vocabulary at each step, resulting in a combinatorially vast output space. Moreover, the inherent nature of natural language allows multiple valid responses for a single input, introducing a substantially higher degree of aleatoric uncertainty—defined as the in- herent, irreducible randomness within the data (H¨ullermeier & Waegeman, 2021)—than is typically observed in single- step classification tasks (Baan et al., 2023). State-of-the-art UQ methods for free-form generation primarily rely on sampling-based approaches that capture semantic variation within the output space (Kuhn et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Duan et al., 2024; Qiu & Miikkulainen, 2024). Although these approaches generally outperform self-verbalized meth- ods or simple deterministic logit-based methods (Shorinwa et al., 2024; Kuhn et al., 2023), they require a substantial number of samples to approximate the vast output space, resulting in high variance and computational cost, especially given the scale of current LLMs. Unlike sampling-based methods, gradient-based methods directly exploit gradients of the log probability of gener- ated outputs, which can be collected in parallel with the generation process, enabling sampling-free and efficient es- timation. Therefore, a gradient-based method specifically designed for free-form generation is needed. In this work, we introduce, to our knowledge, the first gradient-based approach to uncertainty quantification for free-form generation in LLMs. if a well-trained LLM is confident in its response to a query, its output distribution should remain stable when the query is perturbed with semantically equivalent vari- ants (Li et al., 2025), as illustrated in Figure 1 (a). Notably, our method does not rely on any assumption about the form of the ground-truth distribution and thus remains valid even under high aleatoric uncertainty. To identify the embeddings that best preserve input seman- tic information, we introduce the Semantic Preservation Score (SPS), which measures the alignment difference of each hidden state between semantic-equivalent paraphrases and semantically different ones, and identify the seman- tic preserving embeddings as the embeddings with high SPS. Meanwhile, to mitigate the issue of linguistic redun- dancy, we further propose a simple yet effective method that re-weights the output probabilities prior to gradient computation. To leverage the advantages of both approaches and improve generalization, we propose a hybrid metric namedHybridGrad. At each layer l, the hidden states are updated through a residual connection around a self-attention trans- formation followed by another residual connection around a feed-forward transformation, h(l) j =h (l−1) j +Attn(h(l−1) ≤j )+FFN(h(l−1) j +Attn(h(l−1) ≤j )) where j≤t and attention operates on previous tokens by a causal mask. However, which layer should be chosen? Prior work (Li & Subramani, 2025) has shown that early layers primarily encode lexical features rather than semantic content. To support further analysis, we propose the Semantic Preser- vation Score (SPS), which measures how well a model’s hidden representations preserve input semantic structure across layers and token positions: Formally, given a set of input queries {x1,x 2, ...,xN }, for each xn, we generate K semantically equivalent para- phrases {x(j) n }K j=1 and set x(0) n ≡x n. Then, for a given LLM, let h(l) −t(x) denote the hidden states at layer l for the t-th token counted from the end of x (t= 1 is the last to- ken), obtained by forwarding x through the LLM. Then the average across-query similarity is obtained Sl,t a/c = 1 N(N−1) X n̸=m scos  h(l) −t(xm),h (l) −t(xn)  Then the Semantic Preservation Score ofh(l) −t(x) is obtained by the difference between them: Notably, we do not compute gradients with respect to the last-layer hidden states, since these are mainly used to de- code the next output token and are not further attended to in subsequent steps. In such low-aleatoric regimes, the ground-truth distribution is typically sharp and unimodal, causing the parameter gradient to align closely with the model’s training objective and yielding greater numerical stability. As a first step, we propose a token- importance–weighted variant of parameter gradients, analo- gous to the construction used for SemGrad; we refer to this variant asParaGrad: Baselines.The performance of our proposed method is com- pared with eleven LLM UQ methods: The boldnumber represents the best performance across all methods for each dataset–model pair. We attribute this to its direct alignment with the model’s training objective in the single-answer setting and the ad- ditional numerical instability introduced by SemGrad’s semantic-proxy representations, as discussed in Section 3.3. Importance of Semantic-Preserving Embeddings To validate the importance of identifying the semantic- preserving embeddings, we compute the correctness pre- diction performance of SemGrad with respect to different hidden states across layers and tokens. Specifically, we re- place the h↑ t∗ in Equation (4) with h(l) −t for each layer l and the last t-th tokens. We then compare the resulting AUROC scores with the corresponding SPS scores for each hidden state. (1) the choice of norm, (2) the importance reweight- ing mechanism, and (3) the embeddings (determined by layer and token positions) with respect to which gradients are