REAL METHOD of "Image Restoration via Diffusion Models with Dynamic Resolution" (arXiv 2605.14267v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

While meth- ods based on latent DMs seek to alleviate this issue by utilizing the compressed latent space of a variational autoencoder, they require repeated encoder-decoder inference. We first fine-tune pre- trained DMs for dynamic resolution priors and adapt DPS and DAPS, which are two widely used pixel-space methods for general image restora- tion tasks, into the proposed framework, yielding methods we refer to as SubDPS and SubDAPS, respectively. Among generative approaches for image restoration, methods based on pretrained diffusion models (DMs) exhibit superior performance. Image restoration with latent diffusion models:Methods based on latent DMs for image restoration also gain research attention. InverseCrafter extends the idea of encod- ing the measurement to the video domain and avoids task- specific training in SILO by combining the encoders of V AE with activation functions. While methods based on latent DMs benefit computationally from inference in a lower- dimensional latent space, these methods typically require repeated inference using the encoder and decoder, resulting in total reconstruction times that even exceed those of their corresponding full-dimensional pixel-space counterparts. Among methods aiming to reduce per-step computational costs, approaches leveraging dynamic resolution DMs have recently gained attention. DVDP (Zhang et al., 2023) decomposes the image into mul- tiple orthogonal components and employs an architecture that accommodates variable dimensions in both the training and inference phases. • We propose methods that apply dynamic resolution DMs to general image restoration tasks. We first fine-tune exist- ing pre-trained pixel-space DMs for dynamic resolution priors and subsequently adapt two pixel-space methods, namely DPS and DAPS, to the dynamic resolution frame- work, resulting in the so-called SubDPS and SubDAPS methods. • Motivated by the favorable reconstruction efficiency and quality of SubDAPS, we introduce several strategies to further enhance it, leading to a method we refer to as SubDAPS++. The experi- mental results demonstrate that the proposed methods out- perform recent DM-based approaches in both reconstruc- tion fidelity and sampling efficiency in the most scenarios, validating the effectiveness of our proposed methods. At each timestep ti, the method utilizes the data prediction network xθ(·,·) to compute the unconditional estimate ˆx0. If the dimensionality changes at timestep ti, the algorithm upsamples ˜x0 and injects random noise to match the diffusion prior. 1) At timestep ti, given xti ∈R di, the sampling method first numerically solves the SDE or ODE from ti to ti−1, analogous to the procedure in full-dimensional DMs, yielding an intermediate state. DPS and DAPS Methods We introduce two widely used DM-based methods for gen- eral image restoration tasks, namely DPS (Chung et al., 2023) and DAPS (Zhang et al., 2025a), prior to detailing their adaptation from full-dimensional DMs to dynamic res- olution DMs. To approximate this term, with the partition of timesteps 0 =t 0 < t1 <· · ·< tN =T , methods generally first obtain a vector ˜xti 0 that estimates the underlying data at timestep ti given current noisy state xti. Methods In this section, we first describe the training of dynamic reso- lution DMs via the fine-tuning of pre-trained DMs. We then detail the adaptation of two widely used DM-based methods, namely DPS and DAPS, from full-dimensional DMs to the dynamic resolution framework, resulting in our SubDPS and SubDAPS methods. Training of Dynamic Resolution Diffusion Models Rather than training dynamic resolution DMs from ran- domly initialized parameters, we fine-tune pre-trained full- dimensional DMs (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Chung et al., 2023), which inherently possess learned structural priors. We implement dynamic resolution across three distinct di- mensions, denoted as d > ˜d > ˆd, utilizing corresponding downsampling matrices ˜U T and ˆU T.1 Adhering to the training strategy described in (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), we formulate the objective for dynamic resolution DMs as follows: Similar to the pre-training of pixel-space and latent-space DMs, the fine- tuning of the proposed method is performed only once. Built upon SubDAPS, we propose the SubDAPS++ method, which uses several strategies to further enhance the reconstruction efficiency and quality. To mitigate this, we propose identifying a cutoff timestep, after which random noise injection is ceased in favor of deterministic state calculation. Specifically, for a given timestep ti, if the squared difference between the unconditional prediction xθ(xti , ti) and the approximate solution ˆxti 0 that minimizes the loss in Eq. Additionally, compared with SubDAPS, SubDAPS++ uti- lizes xθ(xti , ti) instead of multi-step sampling to estimate the data prediction ˜xti 0 at timestep ti for faster inference. To accelerate convergence, we also use the conjugate gradient method to minimize the loss in Eq. (16), as detailed in Sec- tion 3.4, and Algorithm 1 presents the complete procedure for the SubDAPS++ method. Conjugate Gradient Method for SubDAPS++ We utilize conjugate gradient descent to minimize the loss in Eq. For the j-th update of the conjugate gradient method at timestep ti, the step size αj is determined via a line search, formulated as αj = arg min α L( ¯x(j) 0 +αd j; ˜xti 0 , ti),(20) where ¯x(j) 0 denotes the estimated vector of the j-th iteration and dj represents the search direction. Data prediction model xθ(·,·) , observation y, forward operator A(·), total number of sam- pling steps N and inner iterations J, noise schedule {σti }N i=0,{α ti }N i=0, regularization parameter {rti }N i=1, upsampling matrices {Ui}N i=1, upsampling timesteps th, noise levelσ 1:Samplex tN ∼ N(0, σ2 tN IdN ) 2:fori=N, . dj+1 =g j+1 + gT j+1gj+1 gT j gj dj.(25) The complete conjugate gradient descent procedure for the image restoration process is summarized in Algorithm 4 in Appendix D for clarity. 3 We also compare our methods with two methods based on latent DMs, namely ReSample (Song et al., 2024) and LatentDAPS (Zhang et al., 2025a).4 Except for DPS and SubDPS, which require 1000 neural function evaluations (NFEs) to attain reasonably good reconstruc- tions, all methods employ 100 NFEs. To ensure a fair comparison, all methods utilize the same fine-tuned DMs, with the excep- tion of methods based on latent DMs.5 In all experiments, the proposed SubDAPS++ method impleme