REAL METHOD of "DB-KSVD: Scalable Alternating Optimization for Disentangling High-Dimensional Embedding Spaces" (arXiv 2505.18441v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Disentangling high-dimensional transformer embeddings re- quires algorithms that scale to high-dimensional data with large sample sizes. Recent work has ex- plored sparse autoencoders (SAEs) for this prob- lem. However, SAEs use a simple linear encoder to solve the sparse encoding subproblem, which is known to be NP-hard. It is therefore interesting to understand whether this approach is sufficient to find good solutions to the dictionary learning prob- lem or if a more sophisticated algorithm could find better solutions. In this work, we propose Double-Batch KSVD (DB-KSVD), a scalable dic- tionary learning algorithm that adapts the classic KSVD algorithm. Introduction Large transformer models have enabled a wide range of applications in natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), and nu- merous other fields (Dalla-Torre et al., 2025; Wen et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023). The sparse vector x encodes the presence of each monosemantic feature in the embedding. The goal of dictionary learning is then to find this unknown dictionary D given only a finite set of samples {yi}i∈1..n. Although this problem is known to be NP-hard (Razaviyayn et al., 2014), a class of dictionary learning algorithms based on alternating optimization (AO) has been proposed with convergence guarantees under some assumptions (Agarwal et al., 2016). To apply dictionary learning to the disentanglement of trans- former embeddings, we therefore need to scale dictionary learning algorithms to large problem sizes. Recent work has explored the use of sparse autoencoders (SAEs) as a scal- able alternative to established dictionary learning algorithms (Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024; Cunningham et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024; Bussmann et al., 2025). SAEs typically comprise a simple linear encoder and decoder layer and are trained using gradient descent. We refer to these two steps as the sparse encoding step and the dictionary update step, respectively. In this work, we adapt the KSVD algorithm (Aharon et al., 2006), which uses these AO steps. Sparse Encoding.The sparse encoding step aims to find a sparse vector xi for each data sample yi given a fixed dictionary D. In this work, motivated by computational effi- ciency, we adapt the MP algorithm, which greedily selects dictionary elements dj and repeatedly updates a residual r as r←r− ⟨r, dj⟩dj wherej= arg max j′ ⟨r, dj′⟩(3) until the sparsity constraint becomes active. We then replace dj with the first left singular vector of the error matrixEΩj −djXj,Ω, 2 DB-KSVD: For the KSVD algorithm, we also update the values of the nonzero elements in the corresponding row Xj,Ω using the first right singular vector and singular value. Although the dictionary update step typically dominates the runtime of the KSVD algorithm, the com- putational modifications presented in Section 4.1 allow us to significantly decrease the runtime to the point where it roughly matches that of the sparse encoding step. However, even if this model is accurate, it is not clear whether the dictionary learning problem is identifiable, i.e., whether there can exist an algorithm that can actually re- cover the dictionary D and sparse assignments X solely from data samples Y . We use this theory to motivate the need for a scalable adaptation of the KSVD algorithm and to inform our algorithmic and experimental design choices. This constraint transforms the problem from an underconstrained and non-identifiable problem to a sparse dictionary learning problem, which is potentially identifi- able. In this section, we discuss algorithmic modifications to the classic KSVD algorithm that make it possible to scale it to thou- sands of dimensions and millions of samples. Specifically, we make modifications that allow us to reduce the compu- tations needed in each step of the algorithm and map the problem to a scalable number of CPU workers. Parallel Matching Pursuit.The sparse encoding step of the KSVD algorithm initially appears to be “embarrass- ingly parallel” in the samples yi such that it can be easily scaled to a large number of workers. With D⊤D and D⊤Y precomputed, each of the k iterations for each sample reduces to (i) an arg max operation over the precomputed product vector D⊤r(t), (ii) indexing into D⊤r(t) to retrieve ⟨r, dj⟩, and (iii) updating the product vector through a simple vector addition. Batched and Accelerated Dictionary Updates.The dictionary update step of the original KSVD algorithm has an inherently sequential nature. We note that this adapted algorithm is not mathematically equivalent to the original KSVD algorithm. First, we note that we can avoid computing the full singular value decompo- sition of EΩj by using an iterative algorithm to compute only the maximum singular vector. For large n, we can therefore compute the maximum eigenvector of the symmetric matrix EΩj E⊤ Ωj ∈R d×d with an iterative algorithm. The algorithmic modifications to the sparse encoding and dictionary update steps, combined with careful reduction of memory allocations, memory movement, and threading overhead, allow us to efficiently process up to one million samples at a time. To remedy this problem, instead of using all available data at each DB-KSVD iteration, we propose batching the data in a similar manner to mini-batching for gradient descent-based training. In particular, at each step of DB-KSVD, we execute the sparse encoding and dictionary update steps on only a subset of the data samples. At each iteration of the KSVD algorithm, instead of doing a single sparse encoding and dictionary up- date step, we begin by performing these steps using the first group of dictionary elements and assignments only, which we refer to as D(1) and X (1). We then compute the resid- ual matrix E(1) =Y−D (1)X (1) and fit the next group of dictionary elements to this residual matrix E(1). While we perform the sparse en- coding step on all subgroups separately during training, we find that a single sparse encoding step on the full dictionary is sufficient at evaluation time. To evaluate the quality of the found dictionaries, we follow the SAEBench benchmark (Karvonen et al., 2025) and compute six metrics on the resulting dictionaries comprising loss recovered, autointerpretability, absorption, sparse probing, spurious correlation removal, and attribute-value entangle- ment. SAEBench Results We evaluate the performance of our trained dictionaries from the DB-KSV