REAL METHOD of "What if Tomorrow is the World Cup Final? Counterfactual Time Series Forecasting with Textual Conditions" (arXiv 2605.14422v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To further improve adaptability, we introduce counterfactual data aug- mentation by synthesizing diverse counterfactual training samples. Below, we provide a brief overview of the training and inference procedures of the diffusion model. Then, a learnable noise estimation network ϵθ(xt, t,c)is trained by estimating the noise added to xt given the condition c and 1xandx 0 are interchangeable in this paper. The objective function is to minimize the noise estimation loss as: We further prove that our method optimizes the initial noise space of the diffusion model in Sec. 3, the overall process consists of a two-stage inference and a joint training with two optimization objectives. For each denoising step t, the first Lh time points of the output from the previous stept+ 1are replaced with the clear historical sequence xh,0. Overall Learning Objective.The final loss function is the weighted sum of the two losses: To evaluate the influences of the two fac- tors, we introduce a semantic evaluation metric, DTTC (DisentangledTime Series andTextConsistency), which consists of DTTC-I and DTTC-E, measuring the consistency of forecasts with intrinsic historical features and extrinsic future conditions, respectively. a disentangled time series encoder Ets and a text encoder Etext. The training of the DTTC model follows a dataset-specific setting, meaning that the model is independently trained on the training split of each dataset using contrastive learn- ing. To address this challenge, we propose a finetuning algorithm based on constructed counterfactual future conditions, designed to en- hance the model’s adaptability in forecasting under diverse conditions, even in the absence of future ground truth. We first construct a counterfactual dataset by randomly assigning alternative future conditions to each his- torical sequence. For each denoising step t, we have noisy data ˆxf,t to estimate the clear data ˆxf,0 through Eq. 3, and train the model to increase the DTTC scores withλ I , λE as loss weight: In con- trast to prior methods (Melnychuk et al., 2022), which rely on ground-truth future sequences for training, our finetuning approach leverages semantic metrics to optimize the model without access to such ground truth. Given a future sequence, DTTC-I and DTTC-E report the accuracy of retrieving the most similar historical sequence and future condition, respectively, from three candidates. The DTTC model is trained on the training split 8 Counterfactual Time Series Forecasting with Textual Conditions of factual data for each dataset and evaluated on the test split. Finding 8:TADIFFis robust to the training hyper- parameters.We investigate the effect of the loss weight ratio during training and counterfactual finetuning, and the results are shown in Fig. To address these challenges, we propose TADIFF, a text-attributive diffusion model trained on factual data and fine-tuned with counter- factual data. first, we extract structured attributes from the raw time series data, then these attributes are used to generate corresponding textual descriptions. The noise is sampled independently for each time step from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution, xnoise ∼ N(0, σ2), where the standard deviation σ is itself randomly sampled from a small range to ensure variability in the noise level across the dataset. SYNTHDATASET The Synth dataset is algorithmically generated by randomly sampling attributes for each instance, ensuring high variability. The entire process yields 14,000 unique samples, which are then partitioned into training (11,200 samples), validation (1,400), and test (1,400) sets using an 8:1:1 ratio. This section will introduce the architecture and training of the DTTC model in detail. 14 Counterfactual Time Series Forecasting with Textual Conditions Conceptually similar to the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021), the DTTC framework is composed of a dual-encoder architecture: a time series encoder Ets and a text encoder Etext, where the complete parameters can be expressed as ϕ. The time series encoder, which utilizes the PatchTST architecture (Nie et al., 2022), is trained to disentangle an input time series x into two distinct representations: The parameters of the encoder itself, however, are trained from scratch. The training process is guided by two distinct contrastive learning objectives: an intrinsic consistency loss and an extrinsic consistency loss. LI (ϕ) =− 1 B BX i=1 log exp(<I h[i],I f [i]>)PB j=1 exp(<I h[i],I f [j]>) ,(11) The second objective, the extrinsic consistency loss, LE, ensures that the extrinsic features extracted from the time series align with the features from their corresponding textual conditions. The pseudocode for the DTTC model is presented in Algorithm 1 and the detailed model architecture is in Fig. Model Architecture The architecture of the noise estimator of TADIFF, illustrated in Fig. The historical time series xh,0 ∈R Lh and the noisy future time series xf,t ∈R Lf are separately passed through a patchify module to obtain token sequences Ph ∈R Nh×D and Pf ∈R Nf ×D, which are then concatenated along the token dimension to form P∈R N×D with N=N h +N f . Meanwhile, the diffusion step t is transformed into a time embedding etime ∈R D, and the textual condition cf is processed by a text encoder to yield the text embedding etext ∈R D. The text encoder is composed of a pre-trained Long-CLIP tokenizer (Zhang et al., 2024) and two transformer layers trained from scratch. 15 Counterfactual Time Series Forecasting with Textual Conditions Time SeriesEncoder TextEncoderTokenizer Proj. Head Ih If Eh Ef ˜Eh ˜Ef Architecture of DTTC Model contrastive loss Embedding Space Figure 7.The model architecture of the DTTC Model. Algorithm 1Pseudocode for the DTTC Model Training Input:A batch of training tuples(x (i) h ,c (i) h ,x (i) f ,c (i) f )B i=1, wherexare time series andcare texts. 10:# Compute intrinsic and extrinsic losses 11:LetI diag ∈R B×B be the identity matrix, serving as the ground-truth labels. 16:# Compute total training loss 17:L total ← LI +L E ▷Total objective. Each block follows a pre-normalization design, consisting of a multi-head self-attention sub-layer and a feed-forward sub-layer. This yields the 16 Counterfactual Time Series Forecasting with Textual Conditions RMSNorm Multi-HeadSelf-AttentionMLP BlockxN PatchifyPatchify PredictedNoisecConditioningConcatenation TimeEmbedTextEmbed Element-wise Addition Condition cRMSNorm Feed ForwardUnpatchify Conditio