REAL METHOD of "Pseudo-Mallows for Efficient Probabilistic Preference Learning" (arXiv 2205.13911v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We propose an approximate algorithm for this discrete optimization, and conjecture a certain form of the optimal variational order that depends on the data. Recommender systems are iterative algorithms, which combine steps of learning of the indi- vidual preferences obtained by making suggestions to the users, taking their reactions into account (explore), with steps of exploitation, where the aim is to please the users by sug- gesting the items they wish the most. Given a ranking of some of then items (partial ranking), a set of pair comparisons or a collection of clicked items (Liu et al., 2019b), Bayesian inference can be performed by augmentation and Markov 2 Pseudo-Mallows for Efficient Preference Learning Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Algorithms that are commonly used to optimize the ELBO are the Coordinate Ascent Variational Inference (CAVI) algo- rithm (Bishop, 2006) and the Stochastic Variational Inference (SVI) algorithm (Hoﬀman et al., 2013). ItisfollowedbyadetailedexplanationofthePseudo-Mallowsmethod for full rankings, wherein we introduce the Pseudo-Mallows distribution, our conjecture of the optimal variational parameter that achieves the best approximation to the Bayesian Mallows model, and a sampling scheme for inference. In Section 3, we introduce the extension of the Pseudo-Mallows method to learn individual rankings from partial rankings and make personalized recommendations from clicking data. The methodology is then supported by detailed simulations and case studies in Section 4. We introduce the notation{i1,...,i n}∈P n to indicate a ranking of then integers, so that ik is the rank of the integer itemk. (10) Given a ranking{i1,...,i n}, or equivalently an ordering{o1,...,o n}, as well asα =α0 and the full ranking data{R1,..., RN}, we obtain samples from the Pseudo-Mallows distribution ofρ by using Algorithm 1. Based on these properties, we conjecture that the optimal sequence for the terms in (8) is by starting with the middle itemo0 m, and then outwards i.e., ﬁrst the middle itemo0 m, then the two second middle-ranked items (itemso0 m−1 and o0 m+1) and so on until lastly the two edge items. 2.4.2 Empirical study of the Optimal Pseudo-Mallows Conjecture To support the Optimal Pseudo-Mallows conjecture, we conduct an empirical study where the optimization problem (11) is solved ﬁrst by enumeration for a small numbern of items, and then by means of a local search algorithm for largern. Then for every ranking{i1,...,i n}∈P n we draw 200 independent samples from the Pseudo-Mallows distribution given{i1,...,i n} using Algorithm 1. For each 11 Liu, Vitelli, Mannino, Frigessi and Scheel such combination of{α0,N,n}, we generate 20 datasets, and for each dataset, we record the ranking(s){i1,...,i n} that lead to the lowest marginal KL-divergence during each run. Iterated search for moderate number of items.For the case in whichn is such that enumeration of all possible{i1,...,i n} rankings is infeasible, to minimize the marginal KL we propose a heuristic approach based on an iterative optimization algorithm. The idea of our iterative algorithm is to compute a sequence of permutationsρ1,ρ 2,... 12 Pseudo-Mallows for Efficient Preference Learning For each itemj∈ N and each iterationl, we letwl jr represent some approximation of the marginal cost of assigning rankr to j (i.e. Then we letwl j,r equal the diﬀerence in cost (computed as (16)) betweenµl−1 from ρl−1. At each iterationl, once all weightswl are computed as above, we use the Hungarian Method (Kuhn, 1955) to compute the minimum weight perfect matching, which provides us the new permutationρl+1. The iterated search algorithm is more formally described in Algorithm 2. In order to simplify the veriﬁcation of the “V”-ranking’s optimality, we initialize the algorithm by generating a “V”-ranking, and then conductn swaps steps with its neighbor so that the starting point is not a “V”-ranking, but not too far away from the “V”-ranking. Similarly to the full enumeration study, we generate 20 full ranking datasets for each combination of{α0,N,n}, and run Algorithm 2 on each dataset. Selected runs of the iterative search algorithm,n= 15,N = 500, α0 = 2.5 14 Pseudo-Mallows for Efficient Preference Learning We record the{i1,...,i n} ranking of the last iteration of the algorithm at each run, and aggregate these rankings in a heat plot, as shown in Figure 4. That is to say, we start from a rankingˆv from theV setV ˆρ0, and for each itemi, we introduce a perturbation by drawing from a Gaussian distribution centered onˆvi with some standard deviationσ. For each of these datasets, a grid ofσ values is tested, and theσ value that results in the smallest marginal KL-divergence is plotted on the y-axis- resulting in 10 values for each value of α on the x-axis. A description of the complete Pseudo-Mallows algorithm for samplingρ based on full ranking data is summarized in Algorithm 3. 2.6 Preliminary estimation ofα When given a ranking dataset whereα is unknown, an estimate ofα is required before the Pseudo-Mallows method can be applied to make inference on the consensus parameterρ. In this section, we propose a method to estimateα when given a ranking dataset. ∑ RN∈S(BN ) P (ρ|α, R1,..., RN)P (R1,..., RN|B1....,BN) (19) To make inference on (19), the MCMC algorithm alternates between two steps: More precisely, in step (i), based on the current estimation ofρ, the MCMC draws a sample for each userj independently using the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm from the distribution P (Rj|α,ρ,Bj) =P (Rj|α,ρ)1Rj∈S(Bj ). (20) In step (ii), the sampling procedure is the same as when inferring for the group consensus ρ given full ranking data, as in Section 2.1. Therefore we follow Algorithm 3, which samples forρ based on full ranking data, to achieve the best approximation to step (ii). Regarding step (i), i.e., to approximate the Mallows posterior described in equation (20), we draw a sample for each userj independently from QR(Rj|α,ρ,Bj) = ∑ {i1,...,in}j∈Pn f(Rj|α,ρ,Bj) (21) where f(·) is speciﬁed in the following. A summary of the algorithm for estimating both individual rankings{R1,...,R N} and ρ from clicking data is described in Algorithm 5. For each userj, we can calculate for each itemi its probability to be ranked betweencj + 1 and cj +k givenα and the clicking dataB1,...,BN, i.e., P (cj≤Rj i≤cj +k|α,B1,...,BN). These datasets are then binarized by setting, for each user j, the topcj ranked items to 1 and the other items to 0. For each dat