REAL METHOD of "Mitigating Error Accumulation in Continuous Navigation via Memory-Augmented Kalman Filtering" (arXiv 2602.11183v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Then, such stepwise man- ner will inevitably lead to accumulated errors of position over time, resulting in misalignment be- tween internal belief and objective coordinates, which is known as “state drift” and ultimately compromises the full trajectory prediction. Draw- ing inspiration from classical control theory, we propose to correct for errors by formulating such sequential prediction as arecursive Bayesian state estimationproblem. We first mathematically associate Kernel Density Estimation of the measurement likelihood with the attention-based retrieval mech- anism, which then allows the system to rectify the latent representation using retrieved histori- cal anchors without gradient updates. Compre- hensive experiments on TravelUA V benchmark demonstrate that, with only 10% of the training data fine-tuning, our method clearly outperforms strong baselines and regulates drift accumulation. 2Department of Computer Science & Institute of Digi- tal Medicine, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 3School of Computer Science, Central South University, Changsha, China. Effective Correction ------GT TrajectoryNeuroKalman(Ours)Existing Methods Figure 1.Illustration of state drift mitigation.Given a global instruction, existing models ignore the history but make prediction only from current inputs, and thus suffer from accumulated error and state drift to collision (orange line). Recent advance has been made to utilize Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) models, which follow a global natural language instruction and the local visual observation at the current step, to predict the next waypoint (Fan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b; Gao et al., 2025). By incrementally updating the position from past estimates for the next forecasting, the model predicts the full trajectory for UA V navigation step-by-step, which draws a parallel to the concept of dead-reckoning in control theory. As the linguistic instruction remains unchanged throughout the navigation (Liu et al., 2023), it is then assumed to already indicate a global plan implicitly from the initial position to the target destination. aPredictionstep that generates a prior estimate based on motion dynamics, and anUpdatestep that rectifies this belief using the likelihood of historical measurements. We note that this diverges from existing models (Wang et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2025) which primarily focus on generating strong prior estimation while overlooking an explicit mechanism to calibrate these predic- tions (Kloss et al., 2021; Revach et al., 2022). To this end, we propose NeuroKalman, which directly mod- els the Bayesian prediction-update cycle among the latent representations, and decomposes the navigation into two streams. In contrast, Neu- roKalman retrieves relevant historical visual observations. With the mathematical associa- tion between KDE of the likelihood function and the attention-based memory retrieval, we model the Bayesian prediction-update cycle and integrate the selected mem- ory of historical observation to correct the prediction and mitigate state drift in continuous environments. • With a randomly sampled subset of training data for model finetuning, our method clearly improve the model perfor- mance on the TravelUA V benchmark with a clear margin. Some methods rely on large-scale pre-training or data augmentation to improve generalization (Guhur et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). Early methods used recurrent networks like LSTMs (Anderson et al., 2018) or GRUs (Chung et al., 2014) to encode history, but they suffer from information loss over long horizons (Fried et al., 2018). Unlike simple waypoint coordinates, zt encodes a semantic understanding of the UA V’s position and environmental con- text from time step t. P(z t|o1:t, w1:t−1)| {z } Posterior ∝P(o t|zt)| {z } Likelihood ×P(z t|zt−1, wt−1)| {z } Prior (1) Since these distributions are intractable in high-dimensional visual spaces, we propose NeuroKalman to structurally in- stantiate this logic within a neural architecture (Kloss et al., 2021; Haarnoja et al., 2016). An MLLM that encodes multi-modal inputs with historical memory to parameterize the likelihood P(o t|zt), providing retrieved evidence as corrective anchors. This step ef- fectively serving as a dead-reckoning mechanism for the Bayesian filter, and we design an RNN with Gated Recur- rent Unit (GRU) to parameterize the transition distribution P(z t|zt−1, wt−1). Formally, at time step t, this module processes three inputs: The initial hidden state h0 is then obtained by mapping z0 through a MLP layer with a Tanh activation to align with the GRU’s latent space. At each time step t, we first augment the current visual input vt with relevant historical context retrieved from the episodic memory bank M. Retrieval as Kernel Density Estimation.We rigorously formulate the memory retrieval process not merely as fea- ture matching, but as Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) over the visual feature manifold. In our NeuroKalman architecture, we utilize the scaled dot-product attention mechanism. Fusion as Gain The final step fuses the potentially drifting prior estimate ˜zt (from Section 3.2) with the encoded measurement rt (from Section 3.3) to obtain the final corrected posterior zt. We first describe the experimental setup and evaluation pro- 5 Mitigating Error Accumulation in Continuous Navigation via Memory-Augmented Kalman Filtering Table 1.Experimental results on the UA V-Need-Help test seen set, grouped by assistant levels (L1-L3).Boldindicates the best performance among all methods within each assistant level. the Training set con- tains 9,152 trajectories across 20 scenes; the Test-Seen set has 1,410 trajectories from training scenes; the Test-Unseen- Map set comprises 958 trajectories from 2 entirely novel scenes; and the Test-Unseen-Object set contains 629 trajec- tories targeting novel objects. trained on full data (denoted as TravelUA V) and fine-tuned on 10% training data (denoted as TravelUA V-FT). We freeze the MLLM backbone (EV A-CLIP (Sun et al., 2023) as the vi- sual encoder and Vicuna-7B (Chiang et al., 2023) as the lan- guage backbone) and only compute gradients for the visual projector, waypoint predictor, and LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) layers using the Adam optimizer (Learning Rate= 5e−5 , Batch Size=16). Specifi- cally, both NeuroKalman and the TravelUA V are initialized with weights pre-trained on the full data, yet are subse- quently fine-tuned using only a fixed random 10% 