REAL METHOD of "The Implicit Bias of Adam and Muon on Smooth Homogeneous Neural Networks" (arXiv 2602.16340v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We show thatmomentum steepest descentalgorithms like Muon (spectral norm), MomentumGD ( ℓ2 norm), and Signum (ℓ∞ norm) areapproximate steepest descent trajectories under a decaying learning rate schedule, proving that these algo- rithms have a bias towards KKT points of the cor- responding margin maximization problem. Introduction Deep neural networks show remarkable generalization performance despite often being overparameterized, and even when trained with no explicit regularization. A well-established line of work attempts to explain this phe- nomenon with the notion of theimplicitbias (tendency) of gradient-based optimization algorithms to converge to well-generalizing solutions. This bias is often realized in the form of maximizing a certainmarginfor the training points (cf. Indeed, as these algorithms are used near-universally for training large language models (LLMs) and vision trans- formers, there is a growing imperative to understand their inner workings. Moreover, our analysis of Muon is a special case of a more general framework that we develop, which is applicable to all momentum-based optimizers built on top of steepest descent algorithms. All of our results hold for a family of exponentially tailed losses that includes the logistic and exponential losses. In fact, the bias towards margin maxi- mization holds for any normalized Momentum Steepest Descent (MSD) algorithm, for the appropriate norm. We show this includes composite MSD algorithms such as Muon-Signum. (2018) first showed that gradient descent in linear models maximizes the ℓ2 margin. Going beyond 1 arXiv:2602.16340v3 [cs.LG] 24 May 2026 The Implicit Bias of Adam and Muon on Smooth Homogeneous Neural Networks linear networks, Chizat and Bach (2020) studied the implicit bias in infinitely-wide two-layer smooth homogeneous net- works, and proved margin maximization w.r.t. A general treatment of the implicit bias of the family of steepest descent algorithms was given for linear models by Gunasekar et al. AdamW, contrasting with other algorithms by its utilization of explicit weight decay, was studied for smooth models and losses by Xie and Li (2024), who showed that limit points of the trajectory are KKT points of the loss under the constraint that theℓ ∞ norm of the parameters is bounded. (2019); Bock and Weiß (2019a)), and other aspects such as generalization and loss-landscape geometry (Wilson et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2020). Setting and Notations Throughout this work, we consider a fixed binary classifica- tion dataset {(xi, yi)}m i=1 ⊆R d × {±1}, a parameterized model f(x;θ) for parameters θ∈R p, and alog-concave, exponentially tailedloss of the form: L(θ) = mX i=1 ℓ(y if(x i;θ)) = mX i=1 e−φ(yif(x i;θ)) ,(1) where φ is twice continuously differentiable, strictly mono- tone increasing and convex, with bounded first and second derivatives (see Appendix C.1), notably allowing for the ex- ponential (ℓ(u) =e −u) and logistic (ℓ(u) = log(1 +e −u)) losses. Optimizers The optimization algorithms we study are derivatives of thesteepest descentfamily, a generalization of gradient 2 The Implicit Bias of Adam and Muon on Smooth Homogeneous Neural Networks descent defined with respect to a norm ∥·∥ (and its dual norm ∥·∥⋆). We study the infinitesimal step size (flow) limit of the optimization trajectories. We define steepest descent and its normalized variant in the general case of a subdifferentiable model f, allowing for a learning rate scheduleη(t)>0, as follows: Muon with exact orthogonalization is recovered from Equation (6) with ∥·∥=∥·∥ sp for a single-layer network. When running Muon simultaneously on each weight matrix of a multi-layer network, the resulting trajectory follows Equation (6) with ∥·∥=∥·∥ msp (see notations in Subsection 2.1). Our results pertain to the following objective, known as margin maximization, which is not directly optimized by any of the aforementioned algorithms: Moreover, we show that running multiple normalized (mo- mentum) steepest descent algorithms in parallel on different parts of the parameter vector with respect to different norms is equivalent to a single run of normalized (momentum) steepest descent algorithm relative to the maximal norm among them (see Appendix C.6). Experiments To validate our findings we train two-layer (one hidden layer) homogeneous networks to classifym= 2048 MNIST digits (LeCun et al., 2002) as even or odd, using the logistic loss. Training proceeds until the loss reaches a small target value (10−8). The study is conducted through the unifying perspective of approximate steepest descent, a framework we believe to be general and widely applicable to first-order optimization methods related to the steepest descent family. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks trained with the logistic loss. Reconstructing training data from trained neural networks.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22911–22924. Reconstructing training data from real world models trained with transfer learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15845. Training deep learn- ing models with norm-constrained lmos.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07529. , f(xm;θ)) that any g∈∂L(θ) is given as a sum g= Pm i=1 ℓ′(yif(x i;θ))y ihi where ℓ′ is the derivative of the per-sample loss, and hi ∈∂f(x i;θ). if I∞(F, c)<∞ then the result again follows from item 1, and ifI ∞(F, c) =∞then A(F,c) A(g,c) = I(F,c)(t) I(g,c)(t) → ∞and in particularA(F, c)≥Ω(A(g, c)). If eventually g(t)≤M for some M∈R then A(g, c)(t)≤M+ o (1) , and if eventually g(t)≥M then A(g, c)(t)≥ M−o (1). Algorithm-Independent KKT Stationarity In this section we provide general insight into properties of trajectories of homogeneous models, culminating in Theorem C.8 which shows that KKT stationarity of a limit point of θt ∥θt∥ with respect to Problem (11) follows from decay of the loss and alignment between gradients and parameters. Iflog 1 L(θt) > φ(0)then LL(θt) φ−1(log 1 L(θt) ) (φ−1)′(log 1 L(θt) ) ≤LL(θ t)·min i∈[m] φ′(zt i )zt i ≤ ⟨−gt,θ t⟩.(26) Ifq t min > q >0andθt ̸=0then φ′(q)LL(θt)γ(θt)∥θ t∥L ≤LL(θ t)·min i∈[m] φ′(zt i )zt i ≤ ⟨−gt,θ t⟩.(27) 5. Composite MSD Algorithms, Muon and Muon-Signum In this section we prove a simple lemma showing that by partitioning the parameters of a model and training each part with a different normalized SD/MSD algorithm, the resulting algorithm is itself normalized SD/MSD with respect to the maximum among the norms. This allows formulating Muon (on multi-layer