REAL METHOD of "Any3D-VLA: Enhancing VLA Robustness via Diverse Point Clouds" (arXiv 2602.00807v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Some works, while keeping the input strictly 2D, introduce a depth-pretrained encoder (Yuan et al., 2025) or a pretrained spatial encoder (Lin et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2025b) (e.g., VGGT (Wang et al., 2025)) to incorporate depth and 3D priors into the model. Several stud- ies investigate how to incorporate point-cloud information (Li et al., 2025a;d; Sun et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025a; Singh et al., 2025), but they are still constrained by the lack of a pretrained point encoder or by relying on non-parametric 3D tokenizers. A pre-trained point cloud encoder then produces point-wise embeddings. By lifting visual inputs into point clouds, compressing them, and fusing 2D–3D rep- resentations, our method provides a general and modular framework for injecting 3D representations into VLAs. (2) To address the scaling bottlenecks of 3D VLA training and the cross-environment domain gap, we introduce a hybrid point-cloud training strategy and construct a large-scale RGBD dataset for VLA tasks. Recent works typically adopt transformer-based architectures that predict actions autoregressively and are trained on large- scale robot trajectories. PointVLA (Li et al., 2025a) injects point-cloud features into a pre-trained VLA action expert via an injector, without retraining the entire model. 3DS-VLA (Li et al., 2025d) encodes 3D spatial ob- servations using a pre-trained 2D vision-language model and establishes 3D spatial constraints to facilitate spatiotempo- ral reasoning. However, many of these methods are limited by non-pretrained point encoders or non-parametric 3D tok- enizers; some rely solely on point-cloud inputs (Singh et al., 2025) or treat point clouds relatively independently from 2D inputs (Li et al., 2025a). At each time step, depth maps aligned with RGB pixels are provided, ac- quired via two methods: To validate the effectiveness of pre-training insimulation, we constructed an RGBD evaluation dataset as a benchmark using the same procedure. This dataset includes 15 ob- ject categories that appeared in the pre-training data, while the layouts and backgrounds are randomly generated and unseen during pre-training, resulting in 95 distinct scenes. (2) We uniformly freeze the image encoder and only fine-tune the last four layers of the other branch (if present). (3) Aside from the visual module, all methods share the same model architecture and training strategy. Setting Observation space Depth used? 3D explicit? Visual module (encoders/representation) 2D-onlyo rgb t ={I (v) t }v × ×Standard image encoder on RGB (DINOv2+SigLIP); outputs 2D patch tokens only. (1) standard image encoder (DINOv2+SigLIP), (2) depth- pretrained image encoder (Depth Anything v2 encoder; DPT decoder discarded). (1) standard image encoder (DINOv2+SigLIP), (2) spatial foundation model encoder (VGGT) trained with multiview geometric reconstruction objectives; geometry heads discarded. Point cloud–2D patch fusion opc t :{[I (v) t , D(v) t ]}v → Pt √ √ Lift RGBD to point cloud Pt ={(x i, yi, zi, ci, ni)}i using intrinsics; 3D-space compression + pretrained point-cloud encoder (Concerto); align to 2D patches and fuse with 2D image tokens (DINOv2+SigLIP). The potential reason for this is that implicit methods (such as VGGT or depth-pretrained encoders) rely on reconstruction objectives to learn spatial features; consequently, they often lack precise metric alignment and are prone to spatial hal- lucinations during fine-grained manipulation. ANY3D-VLA We propose ANY3D-VLA, which adopts a point cloud–2D patch fusion approach (inspired by §4) along with a hybrid point cloud training strategy. The VLM comprises a trainable large language model InternLM2 1.8B (Cai et al., 2024), a visual observation module (§5.2), and a trainable projector that maps visual representations into the language space. 4 ANY3D-VLA Vision Encoder.The compressed point cloud is fed into a pre-trained point cloud encoder E3D. We freeze most parameters of the encoder and fine-tune only the last few sparse convolution layers. Concretely, we first project the 3D point back onto the image plane to obtain (ui, vi) =π(xi), discretize the image plane into a regular patch grid, and compute the corresponding linear patch index ai. We define Pj ={i| ai =j} as the set of points assigned to the j-th patch, and perform scatter-mean aggregation (Zaheer et al., 2017) over point features to obtain the patch-level 3D feature: 2D–3D Fusion.We first project the patch-level 3D fea- ture g3D j to the token dimension via a learnable linear layer, yielding h3D j =W 3Dg3D j . hfused j =h 2D j +σ(g)·LayerNorm(δ j),(3) where g is a learnable scalar gating parameter (initialized to -2.1972 so that σ(g) is small at the beginning of training), and σ(·) is the sigmoid function. Training Strategy We follow GraspVLA’s imitation learning and PAG training paradigm (Deng et al., 2025). Hybrid Point Cloud Training.To account for variations in depth quality across different sources during actual de- ployment, we design three training settings.Setting 1 (Sim- ulator Only): For real-world post-training datasets (§6.1.3), all training samples use sensor-based point cloud. For Setting 2, the model is exposed to all point-cloud types throughout training, encouraging the 3D encoder and fusion layers to learn geometric patterns that are invariant to depth sources, thereby tolerating scale bias and other imperfections in model-estimated point clouds. All models are pre-trained on thefull monocular simu- lated datasetand use thesame action chunkingmethod (Zhao et al., 2023), with the chunk length set to 4. During the post-training phase, all models are trained exclusively on tra- jectories (whereas in the pre-training phase, both GraspVLA and our model utilize joint training with bounding boxes and trajectories). Specifically, π0.5 and SpatialVLA are fine-tuned from their publicly released pretrained weights, whereas GraspVLA and our model are first pretrained on our synthetic RGBD manipulation dataset and then fine-tuned. In addition, the Concerto encoder used in our method is itself pretrained through joint 2D–3D self-supervised learning (Zhang et al., 2025; 2026). • Implicit-depth RGB (depth-pretrained image encoder).The observation remains pure RGB images oimpl-depth t = {I (v) t }v, but we introduce two parallel branches: one branch is a conventional image encoder (DINOv2 + SigLIP), and the other is an encoder pre-trained on metric depth estimation (the encoder of Depth Anything 