REAL METHOD of "DreamDojo: A Generalist Robot World Model from Large-Scale Human Videos" (arXiv 2602.06949v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Systematic evaluation on multiple challenging out-of-distribution (OOD) benchmarks verifies the significance of our method for simulating open-world, contact-rich tasks, paving the way for general-purpose robot world models. Unlike previous methods that typically rely on teleoperation data, we exploithuman videosfor pretraining. Through rigorous designs of model architecture and training recipe,DreamDojois able to acquire a comprehensive understanding of physics, achieving plausible simulations across diverse environments and fine-grained controllability over continuous robot actions. A Generalist Robot World Model from Large-Scale Human Videos In-lab DreamDojo EgoDex DreamDojo-HV Robot Post-Training ApplicationsHuman Video Pretraining GR-1 G1 AgiBot YAM Autoregressive Distillation 2 3 4 1 Unseen Environments Live Teleop Model-based Planning Policy Eval DreamDojo Student Figure 1:DreamDojooverview.DreamDojoacquires comprehensive physical knowledge from large-scale human datasets by utilizing latent actions as unified labels. The text embedding is processed by cross-attention layers, while the timestep information is first encoded by sinusoidal embeddings, projected by a lightweight MLP, and then used by adaptive layer normalization for dynamic modulations (scale, shift, gate) (Ali et al., 2025). The whole network is trained using flow matching loss (Lipman et al., 2022). Specifically, given the noise corrupted video latentx𝑡 at timestep𝑡, the flow matching loss minimizes the prediction error with the ground-truth velocityv𝑡: 3.2, and then describe the architecture of DreamDojoand its training recipe in Sec. Post-training on target robots.To adaptDreamDojoto different embodiments, we reset the action conditioning layer and learn the new action space through finetuning. Inspired by these studies, we scale up human videos as a pioneering step for world model pretraining. To realize precise action following, we propose two improvements based on the original architecture. First, instead of using the absolute robot joint poses, we transform them into relative actions by rebaselining the inputs with the pose at the beginning of each latent frame (i.e., every 4 timesteps). The last layer of the action MLP is initialized with zeros to avoid perturbing the pretrained model state at the beginning of training (Zhang et al., 2023), which we empirically found leads to improved physics. The projected embeddings are added with the timestep embeddings and then fed into the adaptive layer normalization within each DiT block. Letz𝑡 =u(x 𝑡, 𝑡,c;𝜃) represent the predicted velocity, then the proposed temporal consistency loss can be expressed as: Post-Training on Target Robots Although learning from human videos exposes the model to a wide range of physics interactions, we still require a post-training stage on the target robot data to adapt our model for downstream applications. To match the target action space, we reinitialize the first layer of the action MLP and fully finetune it along with all other pretrained weights. However, existing video diffusion models are often limited in achieving this due to (1) their bidirectional attention architecture, which defines a fixed horizon length, and (2) a large number of denoising timesteps (e.g., 50), which severely hampers inference speed. Thus, we introduce an additional distillation stage that converts the foundationDreamDojomodel into an autoregressive, few-step diffusion model. We construct𝐺student with the same architecture and model weights of𝐺teacher, with the exception of the bidirectional attention mechanism, which is replaced with causal attention, and the timestep schedule, which is shortened to a few steps (e.g., 4). This process minimizes the train-test distribution mismatch, as the student is trained to generate from its previous outputs. 4.4) (3) Can our architectural design and training objective improve the action-conditioned prediction? (Sec. Experimental Setup Training and inference.The latent action model is a 700M spatiotemporal Transformer (Bruce et al., 2024) that is trained for 400k steps with a total batch size of 256. The video frames are center cropped and resized to a fixed resolution of640×480 , and then clipped into sequences with a length of 13 for pretraining. Both models are pretrained for 140k steps with an effective batch size of 1024 using 256 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. By default, post-training is conducted with 128 NVIDIA H100 GPUs for 50k steps with a batch size of 512. Thedistillationstageinitializestheautoregressivestudentmodelwiththeweightsoftheteacher, whilereplacing bidirectional attention with causal attention over a sliding window size of 12 frames. First, for the warmup stage, we generate 10k ODE trajectories and train for 10k iterations. Next, for the distillation step, we have the student randomly generate between 13 and 49 frames during training, and compute loss on the last 13 generated frames. During inference, the teacher model utilizes 35 denoising steps for generation, while the distilled model reduces this number to 4 steps. Benchmark construction.To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct a systematic evaluation that emphasizes out-of-distribution scenarios and counterfactual actions. To demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed latent action conditioning, we compare our method with three representative baselines: Without pretraining.In this setup, the model is initialized from Cosmos-Predict2.5 directly for post- training without observing the human videos. Action-free pretraining.In this baseline, we pretrain the world model on unlabeled videos as passive future prediction. All compared methods are pretrained for 50k steps on the corresponding human datasets and post-trained for 25k steps on the in-distribution GR-1 dataset. The post-trained models are evaluated on In-lab Eval and EgoDex Eval, which contain novel objects and actions not present in the GR-1 training dataset. Pretraining with latent actions can reach a much higher upper bound than action-free pretraining and without pretraining. Specifically, we pretrain our model on different data combinations for 50k steps, and then post-train on the GR-1 dataset for 25k steps. Ablations of Our Design Choices To efficiently verify the effectiveness of our architectural design and training objective, we finetune Cosmos- Predict2.5for30kstepsonlyontheGR-1trainingdataset. 7, evaluating the distillation results of a teacher pretrained on huma