REAL METHOD of "On Densest $k$-Subgraph Mining and Diagonal Loading: Optimization Landscape and Finite-Step Exact Convergence Analysis" (arXiv 2410.07388v4). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Optimization Landscape and Finite-Step Exact Convergence Analysis Qiheng Lu 1 Nicholas D. We first establish the tightness of the relaxation, ensuring that the global maximum values of the original combinatorial problem and the relaxed problem coincide. Then we reveal the benign geometry of the optimization landscape by proving a strict di- chotomy of stationary points: We propose a saddle- escaping Frank–Wolfe algorithm and prove that it achieves exact convergence to an integral local maximizer in a finite number of steps. However, it has been observed that DSG algorithms tend to extract large and sparsely connected subgraphs in practice (Tsourakakis et al., 2013). This bias makes DSG algorithms often overlook smaller, highly cohesive structures (e.g., small cliques) in favor of larger, sparser subgraphs. Other variants of cardinality-constrained dense subgraph problems have also been explored, such as the Densest at-least-k Subgraph (DalkS) problem and the Dens- est at-most- k Subgraph (Dam kS) problem (Andersen & Chellapilla, 2009; Khuller & Saha, 2009). Imposing the cardinality constraint renders D kS NP-hard (Feige et al., 2001). Moreover, D kS is known to be diffi- cult to approximate (Khot, 2006; Manurangsi, 2017; Jones et al., 2023) and the best known polynomial-time algorithm achieves only an O(n1/4+ϵ) approximation ratio in time nO(1/ϵ) for everyϵ >0(Bhaskara et al., 2010). Optimization Landscape and Finite-Step Exact Convergence Analysis Decomposition (SVD). Alternatively, Yuan & Zhang (2013) leverage the Truncated Power Method (TPM) to tackle DkS. More recently, gradient-based algorithms for tackling con- tinuous relaxations of D kS have been proposed. (2016) introduced a pair of algorithms for solving a relaxation based on sparse Principal Component Analysis (PCA), while Sotirov (2020) applied coordinate descent on a continuous relaxation of D kS, obtained by relaxing the feasible set to its convex hull. Konar & Sidiropoulos (2021) convexify the objective function through the Lov´asz exten- sion and relax the feasible set to its convex hull, leveraging the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) to solve the resulting formulation. (2024; 2025) proposed two penalty- basedexactnon-convex, continuous relaxations of D kS and leveraged gradient-based algorithms embedded within a homotopy-based framework to solve them. Without investigating the problem’s intrin- sic geometric properties, such parameter choices may result in challenging optimization landscapes for gradient-based algorithms. In addition, none of (Liu et al., 2024; 2025) characterize the stationary points of their re- laxed problems, which hinders the development of more principled algorithmic designs. • Convergence Analysis of Frank–Wolfe:We also ob- serve that their algorithm always converges to an integral stationary point, thereby eliminating the need for any post- processing rounding procedure. We prove that our algorithm escapes non-integral saddle points and achievesfinite-step exact convergenceto an integral local maximizer, thereby explaining the algorithm’s natural con- vergence to integral solutions without rounding. Since the constraints of (3) satisfy the Linearity Constraint Qualification (LCQ), the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) con- ditions also equivalently characterize the stationary points of (3). Optimization Landscape and Finite-Step Exact Convergence Analysis Definition 3.9(Strict Saddle Point).A stationary point x is a strict saddle point of (3) if the following first and second- order conditions hold: Algorithm and Convergence Analysis Motivated by the benign landscape of (3), we propose the Saddle-Escaping Frank–Wolfe (SE-FW) algorithm in this section. The core idea is to augment the classic Frank–Wolfe method (Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Jaggi, 2013) with an escape step that is triggered specifically in the neighborhood of saddle points. Roadmap of Section 4:We first prove finite-step exact convergence once the iterate enters the basin of an integral local maximizer (Theorem 4.1). We then show that both standard Frank–Wolfe steps (Theorem 4.12) and escape steps (Corollary 4.9) strictly increase the objective. Finally, leveraging the convergence guar- antee of the standard Frank–Wolfe steps (Theorem 4.12), we obtain a finite-step exact convergence result. Algorithm Description The SE-FW algorithm (Algorithm 1) is designed to identify integral local maximizers with finite-step exact convergence. Finite-Step Local Convergence We first consider the algorithm’s behavior in the neighbor- hood of local maximizers. If the iterate x(t) satisfies ∥x(t) −x∥ 2 ≤ σx 4L, then the algorithm converges exactly to the local maximizer in the next step, i.e.,x (t+1) =x. In contrast, another well-known adaptive step size min n 1, (v(t))Td(t) 2kL o (Lacoste-Julien, 2016) vanishes asymptotically due to the constant denominator, preventing the algorithm from exact convergence. Hence, we propose additional “escape steps” which exploit the positive curva- ture at x(t) to construct directions of strict ascent to enable the algorithm to escape such points. Specifically, if the objective gain from an escape step does not meet the theoretical bound in Corollary 4.9, we reduce the trigger threshold by a factor β∈(0,1) to enforce stricter proximity. Global Convergence Analysis Having established the ascent guarantee during the saddle escape step, we now turn to the global convergence analysis of the proposed algorithm. Theorem 4.12.Let {x(t)} be the sequence generated by Algorithm 1 with no saddle point escape step triggered, then the objective values {g(x(t))} are strictly monotonically increasing until a stationary point is reached, and the mini- mum Frank-Wolfe gap ˜GT = min0≤t≤T G(x(t))satisfies: By combining the strict monotonicity ensured by Theo- rem 4.12 for standard Frank–Wolfe steps with the Ω(1/n2) objective increase guaranteed by Corollary 4.9 for escape steps, together with the O(k2) upper bound on the objective value, we obtain an upper bound on the number of escapes. Synthesizing the finite-step local convergence, the strict monotonicity in objective value, the convergence rate of Frank–Wolfe, and the bound on the number of escape steps, we establish that Algorithm 1 converges exactly to an inte- gral local maximizer in a finite number of total iterations. This behavior empirically validates Theorem 4.1 and confirms the prediction in Remark 4.2 that the adaptive step-size rule proposed by Lacoste-Jul