REAL METHOD of "RefineEvo: Planning-Guided Heuristic Evolution with Bidirectional Experience" (arXiv 2607.11358v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This module explicitly maintains both positive insights (successes) and negative pitfalls (failures), coordinating a Reflector to accumulate experience and an Evolver to retrieve it. It then retrieves the most relevant records from the pool based on semantic sim- ilarity. Positive experiences are retrieved to provide ”In- sights to Follow,” while negative experiences are retrieved to provide ”Pitfalls to Avoid.” These retrieved insights are explicitly injected into the generation prompt. 3.2) */ 13:ifPLANNERTRIGGERREFINE(o,S t,z t)then 14:p o ←REFINE(p o;S t,z t) 15:end if 16:forj= 1toNdo 17:/ * Retrieve Experience (Sec. 3.3)*/ 18:Parents←SELECTPARENTS(P t, o) 19:q←BUILDQUERY(Parents, o,S t) 20:C exp ←RETRIEVE(E +, q)∪RETRIEVE(E −, q) 21:/ * Evolution & Evaluation */ 22:h new ←EVOLVER(Parents, po, Cexp) 23:Evalh new onI 24:/ * Experience Management (Sec. The bars represent the mean optimality gap for each method. TSP aims to minimize the total tour length under visitation constraints, while CVRP further introduces vehicle capacity constraints across multi- ple routes. The objective is to assign a stream of L items with sizes si to a minimum number of bins with capacity C. For Constructive Heuris- tics on TSP, KP, CVRP, VRPTW, and Online BPP, the system evolves the scoring function H(·) to prioritize can- didate moves step-by-step. On small-scale TSP (n≤100 ), the NCO method POMO retains an advantage, aligning with its strength in fitting fixed training distributions. RefineEvo secures the highest objective value starting from n= 100 and maintains monotonic improvements on high- dimensional instances (n= 1000 ), demonstrating superior stability where other methods plateau. w/o trajectory replaces parent-to-offspring tracking with population pairwise comparisons; w/o situation re- moves retrieval constraints, injecting all past experiences indis- criminately. Future work includes extending Refi- neEvo to constrained optimization and multi-objective set- tings, as well as investigating theoretical foundations of experience-driven search dynamics. One-shot autoregressive generation of combinatorial optimization solutions based on the large language model architecture and learning algorithms.AI, 6(4):66, 2025. Each task specifies (i) an instance space (e.g., distances, coordinates, demands, item values/weights), (ii) a solution representation (e.g., tours, routes, subsets, assignments), and (iii) an objective function to minimize (routing/grouping) or maximize (subset selection). In theonlinesetting, items arrive sequentially and the algorithm must irrevocably decide a bin for each item upon arrival, whileofflineBPP assumes all items are known beforehand. To mitigate statistical variance, we perform three independent runs per method for each application setting. We compute diversity directly from fitness statistics as the normalized standard deviation of the population’s objective values: Table 13 reports the initial and final operator descriptions to design step-by-step construction heuristics for TSP, showing how the operator library can shift from generic novelty/sim- plification goals to more structured guidance aligned with the discovered effective patterns. Initial description Final description op1 create a new algorithm that has a totally different form from the given ones design novel algorithms that maintain computational efficiency while ensuring consistent exploration be- yond local optima. op2 create a new algorithm that has a totally different form from the given ones but can be motivated from them explore algorithms that enhance adaptive looka- head with intelligent dynamic candidate filtering, destination-aware threshold optimization, and multi- phase regret-progressive evaluation. op3 create a new algorithm that has a different form but can be a modified version of the algorithm provided create a refined algorithm that specifically focuses on dynamic lookahead optimization to escape local op- tima while maintaining destination-aware filtering. op4 identify the main algorithm parameters and create a new algorithm that has a different parameter settings of the score function provided create algorithms that integrate adaptive candidate fil- tering with sophisticated path-based scoring mecha- nisms to achieve breakthrough performance improve- ments. "This algorithm combines greedy nearest-neighbor selection with a two-step lookahead mechanism that evaluates potential future moves by considering both immediate distance and the optimal subsequent step from each candidate node."}], 20 RefineEvo: "Combines dynamic candidate filtering with lookahead optimization, first selecting promising candidates via distance thresholding then performing depth-limited optimal path evaluation from each candidate."}, "objective_type": ["Implement staged evaluation with increasing computational intensity", "Use coarse metrics first to filter, then detailed evaluation", "Dynamically adjust evaluation depth based on remaining nodes\"], "applicable_when": 2 } Query and Retrieval.Before generating a new offspring, the Evolver constructs a retrieval query from the current operator goal and the parents context. We then retrieve top-k items from both banks by semantic similarity using cosine similarity and inject them into the evolution prompt. This algorithm combines greedy nearest-neighbor selection with a two-step lookahead mechanism that evaluates potential future moves by considering both immediate distance and the optimal subsequent step from each candidate node. When e is retrieved and included in the prompt for generating a candidate offspring x, we compare x with its best parent xparent in that iteration using the task objective f(·). When multiple experiences are retrieved for one generation, we apply the same success or failure signal to each retrieved entry. If a newly retrieved candidate experience contradicts an already stored experience under the same (or highly similar) context, we discard the new candidate (i.e., do not add it to the pool and do not use it for subsequent retrieval). Token Cost Breakdown Table 22 provides detailed token statistics for each method on the TSP constructive benchmark under a budget of 1000 evaluations. Table 23 reports the average optimality gap for each method. Detailed Results on TSPLIB We further evaluate the step-by-step constructive heuristics on the real-world TSPLIB benchmark. Planning-Guided Heuristic Evolution with Bidirectional Experience for e