REAL METHOD of "Capacity-Aware Mixture Law Enables Efficient LLM Data Optimization" (arXiv 2603.08022v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

First, we propose CAMEL, a capacity-aware mixture law that models validation loss with the nonlinear interplay between model size and mixture. We also introduce a loss-to-benchmark prediction law that estimates benchmark accuracy from valida- tion loss, enabling end-to-end performance pre- diction for the target model. Fi- nally, we apply our method to Mixture-of-Experts models with up to 7B-A150M parameters to fit the law, and verify the optimal mixture derived from the law by extrapolating to a 55B-A1.2B target model. While the pretraining phase usually utilizes all available data without explicit tradeoffs, the sce- nario changes duringmid-trainingphase (Sun et al., 2020; *Equal contribution 1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2Shanghai Qizhi Institute. Figure 1.Mixture optimization on the target model under different compute budgets.We evaluate different mixture extrap- olation methods by applying them to a larger target model with varying training FLOPS as mixture optimization costs. CAMEL, our proposed method, identifies high-quality data mixtures with even less than the cost of one full training pass on the target model. As the optimization budget increases, CAMEL achieves higher average benchmark accuracy than baseline methods while using less than 50% of the compute cost of the baseline. •:predictedacc.onbenchmark𝑏•:user-definedweightforbenchmark𝑏 Figure 2.End-to-end framework for data mixture extrapolation under model scaling.We first fit a loss-to-benchmark mapping to relate validation loss to downstream benchmark accuracy (Section 2.2). We then model validation loss as a function of model size and data mixtures using sampled (M, r)pairs from smaller models (Section 2.1). Inspired by prior studies, this work aims to develop a prac- tical procedure for optimizing data mixtures in LLM mid- training, in order to maximize downstream performance under minimal computation cost. Building on recent studies that link validation loss to benchmark accuracy (Dubey et al., 2024; Gadre et al., 2024; Mag- nusson et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2026), we introduce a loss-to-benchmark prediction law that maps multiple valida- tion losses to each benchmark’s downstream performance, achieving accurate benchmark prediction in practice (Fig- ure 4). As shown in Figure 1, CAMEL identifies strong data mixtures using less than the cost of one full training pass on the target model, and achieves higher average bench- mark accuracy than baseline methods at much lower cost. • Capacity-Aware Mixture Scaling Laws.We derive a loss-prediction mixture law that jointly depends on mixture ratios and model size, enabling more accurate prediction than baseline methods. • Compute-Aware Experiment Design.We propose an hourglasssample strategy for parameter estimation of the mixture scaling law. • Verification by Extrapolating to Large Models.We evaluate the optimal mixtures on larger models (up to 55B-A1.2B) and show that the mixtures derived by our law consistently achieve higher benchmark accuracy than baseline methods with less compute. Given a mixture r, the model is trained by drawing sam- ples from p(· |r)and minimizing the expected next-token prediction loss min θ Ex∼p(·|r)  −logp θ(x)  , which produces parameters θ(r). We then evaluate these pa- rameters on a held-out validation distribution V, and denote the resulting loss as a function ofr: For a fixed model size and training step with k intrinsic domains, the validation loss is formulated as: Com- pared with approaches that use model size and data mixture separately to fit the law (Ye et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2024), our method yields more accurate loss prediction (Figure 5). Domain-wise loss model.We assume the training loss in- curred on intrinsic domain i follows a power law (Hoffmann et al., 2022). Let ˜mi ≥0 denote the capacity allocated to domain i (e.g., effective model parameters), we model the intrinsic-domain training loss as ℓi( ˜mi) :=C i + Ai ˜mai i , where Ci, Ai, ai are parameters which capture domain- specific learning difficulty. Capacity allocation objective.Inspired by the capacity- allocation perspective of (Gu et al., 2025), we view pretrain- ing as a process in which a model distributes its parameter capacity across intrinsic domains. We empirically examine this view by pretraining models of varying sizes on a fixed mixture of Math and Knowledge datasets, while explicitly monitoring the individual training loss for each domain. As shown in Figure 3, increasing model size leads to a reduction in training loss for both datasets. For each domain 3 Capacity-Aware Mixture Law Enables Efficient LLM Data Optimization Figure 3.Training loss observations for each domain across model sizes.We train on a mixed dataset of math and knowledge and log the training loss for each domain. Under the scal- ing form ℓi( ˜mi) =C i + Ai ˜m αi i with fixed training step, this implies Ri = 1−λ −αi L 1−λ −αi M , which should be similar across domains whenα i are close. We hypothesize that given a total capacity budget M, the training process naturally finds an optimal resource distribution. Consequently, we model this implicit allocation as a constrained optimization problem, where the objective is to minimize the mixture-weighted sum of intrinsic losses by optimizing the effective parame- ters ˜m= ( ˜m1, . kX i=1 ˜mi ≤M , (1) where Ctrain = Pk i=1⟨ti,r⟩C i represents the irreducible component of training loss. Alternatively, considering that the exponent dictates how quickly the loss decreases, terms with significantly larger 4 Capacity-Aware Mixture Law Enables Efficient LLM Data Optimization Figure 4.Error of loss-to-benchmark prediction.We model each downstream benchmark accuracy as a function of multiple validation losses. Our method consistently outperforms the baselines across different training samples. To combine this law with the model-size-aware mixture scaling law, we first fit the loss-to-benchmark mapping, then define a benchmark-proxy loss Lb(r, M) =k ⊤ b L. In practice, loss-to-benchmark data is cheap since a single training run gets multiple checkpoints and corresponding loss–accuracy pairs. The procedure samples mixture–loss and loss–benchmark pairs using a compute-aware strategy, fits the scaling law, and extrapolates it to larger model sizes to obtain the optimal mixture. Setup Model Architecture and Training.We use the Deepseek V3 architecture (Liu et al., 2024a), instantiated at eight scal