REAL METHOD of "CausalRAG2: Hierarchical Causal Knowledge Graph Design for RAG" (arXiv 2602.05143v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To ad- dress these challenges, we propose CausalRAG2, a framework that rethinks knowledge organiza- tion for graph-based RAG through causal gating across hierarchical modules. Introduction While Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) effectively extends Large Language Models (LLMs) with external 1Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA 2Design and Innovation Department, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA. Consequently, as knowledge bases scale in complexity, these methods struggle to maintain retrieval efficiency and reason- ing fidelity. First, current research prioritizes retrieval policies while over- looking knowledge graph organization. This hierarchical architecture, integrated with causal gates, es- tablishes logical bridges across modules, thereby naturally 1 arXiv:2602.05143v2 [cs.AI] 24 Jun 2026 CausalRAG2: Most work emphasizes retrieval policies, while the organization of the underlying knowledge graph is largely overlooked, which strongly influences downstream retrieval behavior. As graphs scale, intrinsic modularity can emerge (Fortunato & Barth´elemy, 2007; Newman, 2018), making retrieval prone to staying within dense modules rather than crossing them, largely limiting the retrieved in- formation. Hierarchical Causal Knowledge Graph Design for RAG Method Knowledge Graph Organization Retrieval and Generation Process Standard RAG (Lewis et al., 2020) Flat text chunks, unstructured. Third, some datasets are stale enough that answers may be partially mem- orized by pretrained LLM models,confounding retrieval quality with parametric knowledge. Global Information Isolation (Recall Gap).Intrinsic modularity often traps retrieval in local seeds, missing rele- vant evidence v∗ located in topologically distant modules (i.e., S∩ {v∗}=∅ as no path exists within h hops).Causal- RAG2introducescausal gatesacross H to bypass modular boundaries and bridge this gap. The overall procedure is formalized in Algorithm 1 (see function definitions in Appendix B), and we detail each component in the subsequent sections. , HL} ←LEIDENPARTITION(G 0, L) {Organize into modulesM} 4:G c ← ∅ 5:for allpair{m i, mj} ∈MODULEPAIRS(M)do 6:ifLLM-ESTCAUSAL(m i, mj) = 1then 7:G c ← Gc ∪ {{mi, mj}} {Establish undirected bi- nary gate} 8:end if 9:end for 10:// Phase 2: Hierarchical Module Construction.We first extract a base entity graph G0 = (V0, E0) from the corpus D using an information extraction pipeline (see details in Appendix B.1), followed by entity canonicalization to resolve aliasing. , HL}, we iteratively partition the graph intomodulesusing the Leiden algorithm (Traag et al., 2019), which optimizes mod- ularity to identify tightly-coupled semantic regions. For each module, we generate a natural language summary to serve as a coarse-grained semantic anchor. In the online stage, the query is embedded and scored to retrieve top-K entities, then N-hop traversal uses causal gates to cross modules and assemble a context subgraph; an LLM further distinguishes causal versus spurious relations to produce the final context and answer. These undirected and binary gates act asshortcutsin the retrieval space, permitting the traver- sal to jump across disjoint modules only when logically warranted, thereby breaking information isolation without causing semantic drift (see Appendix C for visualizations of hierarchical modules and causal gates). in a modular graph H, if seed nodes lie in module mi while gold evidence resides in a distant module mj, local h-hop traversal is provably unable to reach mj (the information isolation problem in Section 3). Retrieve Subgraph via Causally Gated Expansion Given the hierarchical structure H and causal gates Gc, CausalRAG2 retrieves a support subgraph S by coupling multi-granular anchoring with a topology-aware expansion. First, to cover Naive and Flat approaches, we includeNaive Genera- tion(no retrieval) as a lower bound, alongsideBM25 (sparse) andStandard RAG(Lewis et al., 2020) (dense embedding-based), representing mainstream unstructured retrieval. To measure whether retrieval actually supports generation, we addition- ally compute grounding metrics, context recall and answer relevancy (Es et al., 2025), which jointly capture coverage and answer quality (see Appendix F.4). Specifically, adding hierarchy or causal gates alone broadens retrieval coverage and improves Context Recall, yet the additional cross-module evidence also introduces noise that depresses F1 and Answer Relevancy. The gap scales with graph heterogeneity, reaching +24.83 F1 on HotpotQA (2,359 modules) and narrowing to +0.62 F1 on HolisQA-CompSci (158 modules), aligning with the prediction in Section 3 that hierarchy matters more when flat traversal cannot reliably reach distant evidence. Construction time follows the same pattern, indicating that the LLM calls for causal gate verification do not impose disproportionate offline overhead because of our Top-Down Pruning algorithms (see Algorithm 2). Prompts used in Online Retrieval and Reasoning This section details the prompt engineering employed during the online retrieval phase of CausalRAG2. Algorithm Details of CausalRAG2 This section provides granular details on the offline graph construction process and the specific algorithms used during the online retrieval phase, complementing the high-level description in Section 4. Constructing causal gates via exhaustive pairwise verification across all modules results in a quadratic time complexity O(N 2), where N is the total number of modules. To address this, we implement aTop-Down Hierarchical Pruningstrategy that constructs gates layer-by-layer, from the coarsest semantic level (HL) down to H1. when two parent modules are already gate-connected, a path between their children exists via the parent gate plus hierarchical edges, so verifying additional child-pair gates yields no new traversal reachability (see full algorithm in Algorithm 2). 2.Intra-layer Verification:We first identify causal connections between modules within the current layer. Inter-layer Look-Ahead Pruning:When searching for connections between a module u (current layer) and modules in the next lower layer (l−1), we prune the search space by: We assign higher weights to Causal Gates (w= 1.2 ) and Hierarchical Links (w= 1.0 ) to encourage the model to leverage the organized structure, while assigning a lower weight to generic Structural Edges (w= 0.8) to suppress ai