REAL METHOD of "LIMSSR: LLM-Driven Sequence-to-Score Reasoning under Training-Time Incomplete Multimodal Observations" (arXiv 2605.00434v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

While Incomplete Multi- modal Learning (IML) has gained traction, ex- isting methods typically rely on the unrealis- tic assumption of full-modal availability during training to provide reconstruction supervision or cross-modal priors. 1Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Networking Comput- ing and Intelligent Information Processing, College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China 2Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence, Min- istry of Education, Fuzhou 350108, China 3Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. Prompt Generative Model Figure 1.(a) Reconstruction-based and (b) Distillation/Prior-based incomplete multimodal learning methods typically rely on the un- realistic “full-modal training” assumption to generate missing data or distill priors. In contrast, (c) ourLIMSSRleverages the context- aware reasoning capabilities of LLMs to infer latent semantics from available modalities under the more challengingTraining- Time Incomplete Observations, eliminating the dependency on complete training data or reconstruction supervision. Reconstruction-basedmethods (Yoon et al., 2018; Wen et al., 2024) (Figure 1(a)), which generate missing data or latent spaces from available inputs, andDistillation/Prior-based methods (Li et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024d) (Figure 1(b)), 1 arXiv:2605.00434v1 [cs.CV] 1 May 2026 LIMSSR: A common premise of these methods is the assumption of “Full-modal training,” where complete data is available during training to provide supervi- sion or priors. Due to collection costs (Liu et al., 2021) or privacy constraints (Jaiswal & Provost, 2020), training data often suffers from systemic missingness. Then, on the interface side, we introduceLLM-DrivenMultidimensionalRepresentation Fusion (LMRF). Recognizing that task loss alone is insufficient to constrain the latent space effectively, we introduce specific optimiza- tion strategies. Extensive experiments demonstrate the ef- fectiveness of our method on three public AQA datasets: • This paper novelly formulates Incomplete Multimodal AQA (IMAQA) as a conditional sequence-to-score rea- soning task and systematically investigates the training- time incomplete multimodal learning where modalities are missing during both training and testing. Our method outperforms existing supervision-dependent methods even under training- time incomplete multimodal observations, achieving the new state-of-the-art on three public benchmarks. LLM-Driven Sequence-to-Score Reasoning under Training-Time Incomplete Multimodal Observations Incomplete Multimodal Multimodal Feature Partly Missing in both Training and Inference AudioRGB Flow Xf Specific Feature Extractor Modality Missing Condition XaXv Specific Projection · · · Prompt-Guide Context- Aware Modality Imputation Prompt-Guide Context- Aware Modality Imputation Input Task Prompt Given the available {avail. However, these methods typically assume full modality availability during both training and testing, overlooking real-world modality missingness. The first is reconstruction-based methods, such as ActionMAE (Woo et al., 2023), IMDer (Wang et al., 2023), Gain (Yoon et al., 2018), and DMVG (Wen et al., 2024), which reconstruct missing modalities representation via generative or proba- bilistic models. MissRAG (Pipoli et al., 2025) proposes a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) framework to com- pensate for missing modalities by retrieving semantically rel- evant modality tokens from a prototype pool. Approach We first outline the preliminaries and the overview of LIMSSR, followed by detailed introductions of each module. Most existing methods hinge on the availability of com- plete data during training to construct reconstruction losses Lrec(X, ˆX) or distillation targets Ldistill(F(X), F(˜X)) to guide the learning process. Prompt-Guided Modality Imputation Unlike traditional methods that zero-out missing data, we proposePrompt-Guided Context-Aware Modality Im- putation (PCMI)to treat missingness as a variable to be inferred using prompt instructionP inst and placeholders. Modal Sequence Construction.For each modality m, we design two special tokens <m start> and <m end> to denote the start and end of its semantic representation. Role-Aware Weighted Aggregation.Assuming different token embeddings capture distinct evaluation dimensions (e.g., action difficulty, execution quality, and artistic ex- pression), we define learned role weights wrole ∈R K to compute the main fused representation vectorz main: Zattn =Attention(H stack,H stack,H stack).(11) To calibrate feature reliability, we design an adaptive gating network G and a learnable parameter λm. Optimization and Regularization With ground-truth scores y, our LIMSSR framework is trained by minimizing the following objective function: min θ J(θ) =E (Xobs,m,y)∼Dtrain [L(ˆy, y)],(15) where θ denotes all trainable parameters, and L is a com- posite loss function combining three components: Training-time missing modality.∆ SOT Ameans the performance increase or decrease of our LIMSSR compared to the best competing methods. Crucially, unlike existing approaches that rely on the unrealistic “Full- modal training” assumption for supervision or distillation, LIMSSR outperforms these supervision-dependent methods even under the more challengingTraining-Time Incomplete Observations. Furthermore, compared to leading unimodal methods (T²CR (Ke et al., 2024), CoFInAl (Zhou et al., 2024), and ASGTN (Liu et al., 2025b)), our method exhibits significant performance margins across all benchmarks, confirming its ability to mitigate the adverse effects of missingness and successfully harness the strengths of multimodal learning. Effect of Loss Terms.We further analyze the auxiliary Figure 3.Visualization of fusion token attention weights across different modality combinations on the FS1000 (PCS). These re- sults confirm that both losses are essential for constraining the latent space and ensuring robust multimodal representa- tion learning. Visualization Analysis In Figure 3, we visualize the attention weights of the K fu- sion tokens in the LLM’s final layer across input modalities. Rather than performing pixel-level reconstruc- tion, our method attends to key semantic regions, such as the aggregated global semantics at the end of imputed se- quences, supporting our premise of reasoning-based latent imputation. LLM-Driven Sequence-to-Score Reasoning under Training-