REAL METHOD of "AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions" (arXiv 2605.25707v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Jingwei Sun 1 Jianing Zhu 2 Yuanyi Li1 Tongliang Liu3 Xia Hu 4 Bo Han 1 Abstract Autonomous computer use agents that powered by multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are emerging as capable assistants for complet- ing complex digital workflows. We introduce AgentHijack, a benchmark designed to evaluate the robustness of computer-use agents under common corruptions, where the uncertainties in dynamic environment disrupt the execution flow without direct adversar- ial intent. Perturb Step Perturb Step, Local IP Perturb Step Pop ups Resolution Marks Multi Apps Accidental Touch Network Error Verification App Minimization Subtitle Ours UI-TARS-1.5-7B Relative Decline of UI-TARS-1.5-7B Pop ups Resolution Marks Subtitle Multi Apps Accidental Touch App Minimization Network Error Verification Corruptions 19.20% 17.22% 3.77% 13.77% 17.72% 15.99% 14.51% 38.09% 48.70% Configurable Content, Size, etc. Perturb Step Perturb Step, Local IP Content, Color, etc. • Statistically, we introduce AgentHijack, a detailed benchmark tailored for evaluating the corruption ro- bustness of computer-using agents (in Section 3). Computer-Use Agents In recent years, the advancement of multimodal large lan- guage models (MLLMs) has greatly propelled researches on computer-use agents. Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Table 1.Comparison of different benchmarks on computer-use agents. Performance Evaluation of Computer-Use Agents To evaluate the performance of computer-using agents, a variety of benchmarks have been proposed to assess agents’ capability to accomplish diverse computer-related tasks. Benchmarking the Robustness In this section, we introduce AgentHijack, a benckmark for evaluating the robustness of computer-use agents when facing common corruptions. First, we illustrate the prelimi- nary of computer-use agents (in Section 3.1). At each step, the agent interacts with the environment in a closed loop as it iteratively selects executable actionat ∈ A in step t according to current observation ot ∈ O, which re- sults in a new state st+1 ∈ Sby T:S × A → S. When the maximum number of steps T (e.g., 15 in our experiments) is reached or the agent outputs the termination flag (e.g.Done or Fail), a reward function R is called to assign values between 0 and 1 to measure whether the final state meets the task objective y, i.e., R(sT =y|x,(S,O,A,T))∈[0,1] . The first step is to locate the export function, which should be found in the File menu at the top left corner of the interface. The first step is to open the browser's settings menu, which can be found in the upper right corner of Chrome. Construction of AgentHijack AgentHijack Design.Now, we design a set of common cor- ruptions which are frequently encountered in daily computer use to measure the aforementioned corruption robustness. Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions tent of pop-ups or the steps in which accidental touch occurs. Method In this section, we introduce AgentHijack-Agent, a GUI agent framework capable of handling common corruptions, which integrates an action generator with enhanced ground- ing capabilities and an onlooker responsible for behavior summarization and environment checking. First, we present the key observations that motivate our approach (in Sec- tion 4.1). However, these methods typically require large-scale trajectory data, and the trained agents lack self-correction abilities, making them prone to suffer from error accumulation during working. Given a batch of G responses {oc i |i∈[1, G], c∈ C}from instruction q, the DA-GRPO objective is defined as follows: I need to click on the three-dot button first, and then I will be able to locate the option for changing the search engine.Acion: First, we introduce details of experimental setups (in Section 5.1). Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Figure 6.The ablation of distinct corruption locations and necessity of each module.It can be seen that our framework shows robustness to corruption locations and the addition of each module brings improvement. However, our method consistently out- performs the base model across different corruption intensi- ties, thus validating the broad superiority of our approach. The results presented in Figure 5 clearly demonstrate that while agent performance fluctuates when confronted with diverse corruption content, our method consistently maintains a steady performance improvement, thereby validating the proposed framework can adapt to different scenarios in practical applications. Performance of Distinct Corruption Locations.To eluci- date the disparate impacts arising from corruptions occur- ring at different spatial or temporal locations, we introduced subtitle overlays at varying screen locations and imposed accidental touch or app minimization at distinct execution steps. The results presented in Figure 6 indicate that our method consistently maintains a steady performance im- provement regardless of where and when the corruptions occur, thereby validating the robustness of our framework. Case StudyTo validate the effectiveness of our method in addressing the limitations identified in Section 4.1, we conduct a case study using AgentHijack-Agent on the same set of corruption scenarios. The first step is to open the settings interface, which can be found in the three-dot menu located at the top right corner of the browser. I need to click on this menu button first, and then I will be able to locate the option for changing the search engine.Action: click(start_box=(1137,753)) Can you help me clean up my computer by getting rid of all the tracking things that Amazon might have saved? I want to make sure my browsing is private and those sites don't remember me.Click Click Skip several steps Thought: click(start_box=(712,778)) Can you make my computer bring back the last tab I shut down? Skip several steps Figure 8.Case study of AgentHijack-Agent under various corruptions.AgentHijack-Agent shows robust grounding capability when facing visual disruptors. Conclusion In this study, we introduce AgentHijack, a benchmark de- signed to evaluate the robustness of computer-use agents against common corruptions in realistic interactive envi- ronments. Recognizing that many real-world scenarios requiring assistance at intermediate stages (e.g., when certain s