REAL METHOD of "Fourier Features Let Agents Learn High Precision Policies with Imitation Learning" (arXiv 2606.12334v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We hypothesize that this discrepancy may be due to the spectral bias of neural networks towards learning low frequency functions, which espe- cially affects architectures conditioned on slow- moving Cartesian features. We thus propose to map point clouds from Cartesian space into high- dimensional Fourier space, effectively equipping the point cloud encoder with direct access to high- frequency features. Despite their simplicity, we find that Fourier features pro- vide significant benefits across diverse encoder ar- chitectures and benchmarks and are robust across hyperparameters. RGB images remain the most common type of observation due to their semantic richness and the widespread avail- ability of pretrained vision encoders. Although neural networks are universal function approximators (Hornik et al., 1989), Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) and fully-connected layers have a spec- tral bias towards learning low-frequency components first, while high-frequency components converge slowly or may not be learned at all (Rahaman et al., 2019; Tancik et al., 2020). Although this phenomenon is well-known, these MLPs underpin the majority of point cloud architectures, which use them to encode Cartesian coordinates into latent features. In contrast, the convolutional layers underpinning most image-based architectures are inherently more biased towards high-frequency signals, with evidence that they may be lacking sensitivity to lower frequencies (Abello et al., 2021; Jo & Bengio, 2017; Wang et al., 2020). Experi- mentally, we show that using Fourier-encoded input repre- sentations leads to consistent improvements across different point cloud architectures and benchmarks. This choice allows leveraging powerful pretrained visual encoders and provides strong semantic features, but lacks explicit representation of 3D geometry, causing issues with depth and scale ambiguity. In contrast, a vari- ety of hybrid 2D/3D approaches augment 2D features from pre-trained image encoders with 3D position information reconstructed from the original depth maps, either at the patch level (Ke et al., 2025), the point level (Wilcox et al., 2025), or in voxels (Gervet et al., 2023). We are given a dataset of N expert trajectories Fourier Features Tokenizer Action Decoder Figure 2.Overview of PointPatch encoder family.We group the input point cloud into neighborhoodsN(i) (patch centers indicated in blue on the left). The tokenizer extracts and aggregates features for each neighborhood to produce a set of tokens which are then forwarded to a goal-conditioned diffusion policy Dθ to denoise the next action chunk. This allows us to formulate the point cloud encoder as a message-passing Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2009), a flexible frame- work that encompasses numerous well-known architectures. The transformer receives as input a goal token, a noise level token, H noisy action tokens, where H is the action horizon, and a number of observation to- kens that are provided by a separate architecture, such as a point cloud encoder. After the transformer layers, the final H tokens are passed through a linear layer to arrive at denoised actions. Methods using Fourier Features are marked via hatched bars, and methods are displayed in the order of the legend at the top. Furthermore, we apply Fourier fea- tures to existing architecturesDP3(Ze et al., 2024), which applies max pooling across all points to create a single token, andPointTransformer, which uses attention to aggregate local regions iteratively. We make only minimal, neces- sary changes to each architecture, and apply Fourier feature mappings to absolute and/or relative point coordinates as required by the method. Training and Evaluation.Each method is trained with 5 random seeds, and we test performance at 3 checkpoints. Despite using substan- tially different architectures, DP3 and PCM show similar trends, with both methods clearly benefitting from the use of Fourier features. While the relative ranking of differ- ent architectures is task-dependent, we find that the im- provements from Fourier features are relatively consistent across architectures and task difficulties. Surprisingly, Fourier features greatly increase the performance of the PointPatch + RGB (pretrained) encoder on real world tasks, even though the performance gain on simulation tasks was more minor. We train a single policy on all 8 tasks, reporting the mean and 95% bootstrap confidence interval over5seeds for each method. PointPatch PointPatch-attn + FF PCM DP3 Baseline 0 0.5 1 10−9 10−2 105 Power Density Before Training 0 0.5 1 After Training Eigenvalueλ Figure 8.Graph Fourier spectra of the sensitivities of various archi- tectures with respect to input point coordinates. Our method uses logspaced Fourier Features (FFs) and VariableJitter.Top: We thus argue that Fourier features should be used with practically any point cloud encoder architecture rather than Cartesian point features. Architectures PointPatch.The PointPatch encoder (Pang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Gyenes et al., 2024) divides a given point cloud into overlapping patches, tokenizes each patch and then uses a transformer for token processing. Token position embeddings are computed by passing each centroid position through a two-layer MLP (Pang et al., 2022). PointCloudMatters Encoder.We additionally evaluate the PointCloudMatters-PointNet (PCM) encoder used in Zhu et al. This architecture is based on the patching paradigm introduced in PointMAE (Pang et al., 2022), but applies a max aggregation across patches, followed by a final projection head to compute a single token for the entire point cloud. DP3 Encoder.Unlike patch-based methods, the DP3 encoder (Ze et al., 2024) creates a single token that embeds information from the entire point cloud. PointTransformer Encoder.Inspired by the success of attention-based in methods in vision models, PointTransformer (Zhao et al., 2021) applies attention in a hierarchical manner. Because of the high compute costs of this architecture, we train each policy on 2-3 tasks instead of the typical 8. RGB+PointPatch Encoder.Due to the flexible transformer design of our denoising model, multimodal observations can be processed by concatenating tokens from parallel observation encoders. We encode the RGB stream from each camera into a token with a ConvNeXt V2 nano (∼15M parameters) (Woo et al., 2023) that is initialized from a pretrained checkpoint. We perform 50 rollouts on Ro