REAL METHOD of "STABLE: Simulation-Ready Tabletop Layout Generation via a Semantics–Physics Dual System" (arXiv 2605.16137v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

(i) aSemantic Reasoner, a fine-tuned LLM trained on a structured table- top scene dataset to generate coarse layouts from input task instructions, and (ii) aPhysics Correc- tor, a physics-aware flow-based denoising model that outputs pose updates to refine layouts, which ensures the physical plausibility of scenes while preserves semantic alignment with task instruc- tions. Introduction Synthetic data is emerging as an increasingly vital compo- nent in both the training and evaluation phases of embod- ied AI, thanks to its inherent advantages of low cost and *Equal contribution. optimization STABLE 0～10 10~20 30~40 20~30 STABLE Collision-Rate 0% MesaTask 5% 15% 20% TabletopGen 25% STABLE～60s Generation Cost One Inference Process Flow-based Physics Corrector LLM-based Semantic Reasoner Add Objects Add Objects Add Objects Optimize CollisionsOptimize CollisionsOptimize Collisions Sim-ready Properties Bbox Interpenetration Containment Multi-Layer StackingObjects per Scene Figure 1.Overview of our proposedSTABLEfor tabletop scene generation. For synthetic data in robotic manipulation, the generation of diverse tabletop scenes that align with manipulation task instructions can provide a wide range of robotic simula- tion environments, thereby receiving increasing attention recently (Gao et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). Despite yielding promising generation results for both room-scale and tabletop scenes, these methods still struggle to synthesize simulation-ready scenes (C ¸elen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Hao et al., 2025), often resulting in object interpenetration or floating artifacts. Inspired by the impressive “System 1, System 2” VLA model adopted in Helix (Figure, 2024), we proposeSTA- BLE, a Semantics–Physics dual-system framework for gen- erating task-aligned and simulation-ready tabletop scenes without compromising scene layout diversity. Given a task instruction, the Semantic Rea- soner is responsible for interpreting the semantics of the instruction and generating a coarse yet task-aligned scene layout that specifies task-relevant objects and their interre- lations. Moreover, we employ subtle signed distance function (SDF) collision losses, which are highly sensitive to inter-object penetra- tion, to effectively resolve object-object and object-table collisions. (1) We propose STABLE, a first-of-its-kind dual-system framework for scene generation, which directly maps task instructions to simulation-ready tabletop layouts by decoupling semantic layout generation from physics-aware pose correction. Recent methods incorporate such principles either by running post-hoc physical optimiza- tion or simulation for generated layouts, or by embedding physics-aware objectives into the generation pipeline. In this work, we explore an alternative direction that enforces physical feasibility through a learned pose correction module with mesh-level constraints, which complements existing physics-based op- timization and simulation pipelines. "Spherical, orange…”}, …] Retrieve 3D Objects Add Noise Geometry Condition Semantic Reasoner Training Process Physics Corrector Training Process Shared Input Data Object-object SDF Loss Object-table SDF Loss (a) The whole training process (b) One progressive inference process Figure 2.Overview of our proposed framework. (a) The training pipeline.Our framework decomposes task-oriented layout generation into two decoupled modules. It is conditioned on geometry embeddings extracted from surface point clouds of retrieved 3D assets (via a frozen PVT-3D encoder). To ensure simulation readiness, the corrector is trained with mesh-level SDF collision losses (object-object and object-table) and a support stability loss.(b) The progressive inference process.STABLE alternates a Semantic Reasoner and a Physics Corrector across stages (Loop 1–3): Specifically, for object Oi we retrieve its asset ai, scale it to match the predicted size si, sample a surface point cloud Pi from the scaled mesh, and extract a geometry embedding using a frozen point-cloud encoder PointTransformerV3(Wu et al., 2024)ϕ(·): Given a coarse pose xc from the Semantic Rea- soner and geometry conditioning G, we define C= (x c,G) and train a conditional velocity field vθ(xt, t,C)(with a U- Net backbone) using Flow Matching(Lipman et al., 2022). Physical constraints via mesh-level SDF losses.Relying solely on data-driven learning can still produce a few but fatal instances of interpenetration, directly causing phys- ical simulation failures. To explicitly enforce simulation readiness, we augment the learning objective with differ- entiable mesh-level signed distance field (SDF) constraints. For each mesh m, we precompute its SDF Dm(x), where Dm(x)<0 indicates that x lies inside the mesh. δ(i, s) = min b∈Bi |Ds(b)|.(14) We select the closest support zsup i = arg mins∈Si δ(i, s) and define gap(i, zsup i ) = min s∈Si δ(i, s).(15) The support-contact loss then enforces the bottom region to be within a small tolerance of the chosen support surface: Finally, the overall training objective of the Physics Correc- tor is LPC =L flow +λ sdf (Lobj-obj +L obj-table) +λsupLsup. For each scene, the Semantic Reasoner expands the layout in stages (Ot →O B →O b), strengthening instruction grounding and reducing missing task-critical objects. The procedure terminates after the final stage Ob for each scene, yielding complete simulation-ready layouts. Results Quantitative results.As shown in Table 1, our method achieves the best overall performance across both semantic quality and physical feasibility. Ablation study What is the effect of physical constraints?We study the contribution of each physical constraint in the Physics Corrector by ablating one loss term at a time while keeping all other components and training settings unchanged. As shown in Table 3, removing any single constraint sig- nificantly degrades simulation readiness, indicating that the three losses are complementary. Method 0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 MesaTask’s Optim.✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ Steerable✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ Physics Corrector✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Table 3.Comprehensive Ablation Study.We evaluate the physi- cal constraints in the Physics Corrector and the progressive scene construction in the Semantic Reasoner. the Semantic Reasoner incrementally com- poses a scene by first reasoning about task-critical objects and then extending to contextual distractors. Rearrangement.To evaluate the Physics Corrector on a downstream rearrangement task, we compare against LEGO- NET, an 