REAL METHOD of "SWING: Unlocking Implicit Graph Representations for Graph Random Features" (arXiv 2602.12703v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Unlocking Implicit Graph Representations for Graph Random Features Alessandro Manenti * 1 A vinava Dubey2 Arijit Sehanobish 3 Cesare Alippi 1 4 Krzysztof Choromanski * † 5 Abstract We propose SWING: Space Walks for Implicit Network Graphs, a new class of algorithms for computations involving Graph Random Features (Choromanski, 2023) on graphs given by implicit representations (i-graphs), where edge-weights are defined as bi-variate functions of feature vec- tors in the corresponding nodes. Rather than conduct- ing walks on graphs’ nodes, those methods rely on walks in continuous spaces, in which those graphs are embedded. It is well illustrated by kernel methods applied for graphs. Similar- ity functions (kernels) between nodes in the graphs or the graphs themselves (Kondor & Lafferty, 2002) are much harder to compute than regular kernels (e.g. Thus in practice applying those techniques is constrained to rela- tively small graphs of a few hundred nodes. To address this challenge, a class ofGraph Random Features methods (or GRFs) was recently proposed (Choromanski, 2023; Reid et al., 2024). Consequently, GRFs can significantly improve computational efficiency of the graph kernel methods and scale up their applicabil- ity to graphs of tens of thousands of nodes and larger, by leveraging efficient calculations with sparse and dense low- rank matrices. clustering algorithms with graph ker- nels (Choromanski, 2023), differential equations on graphs, 1 arXiv:2602.12703v2 [cs.LG] 18 May 2026 SWING: SWING bypasses this step by conducting those random walks in the continuous d-dimensional space, where i-graph’s nodes are embedded (see: The classic example constitue ϵ-neighborhoodgraphs, for which f is given as: In this paper, we propose SWING:SpaceWalks forImplicit NetworkGraphs, a new class of algorithms for compu- tations involving Graph Random Features (Choromanski, 2023) on i-graphs. Unlocking Implicit Graph Representations for Graph Random Features Algorithm 1 Regular GRFs (for weighted graphs):Con- struct vectorsξ ρ(i)∈R N to approximateK α(W) Input:weighted adjacency matrix W∈R N×N , vector of unweighted node degrees (number of out-neighbours) deg∈R N , modulation function ρ: Below, we describe the base GRF method for constructing sparse K1,K 2 for d=N . The procedure to construct random vectors ξρ(i) is given in Algorithm 1. Space Walks on Implicit Network Graphs We are ready to present SWING algorithm. REPLACINGNODE-WALKS WITHR d-WALKS Original GRF-method relies on the random walks on the nodes of the input graph. SWING relaxes this procedure with walks conducted in the d-dimensional space where i-graphs of interest are embedded. Let xt(p)∈R d be the location of the walker, that originates its walk in p, after t steps for t= 0,1, ..., T. However it is not efficient to compute since it requires O(N 2T m)computational time for N mconducted walks (where m stands for the number of random walks per given starting vertex). RANDOMFEATURES TO THERESCUE To obtain an algorithm with the linear dependence on N, we applyrandom features(RFs) (Rahimi & Recht, 2007; 2008). RFs is a method to linearize bi-variate functions K :R d ×R d →R (often kernels) via randomized ϕ1, ϕ2 : We can then write an approximate version of the transition Eq. Proposition 2.1.If a∼P a and b∼P b are independent, thena·b∼ F σ2. We con- clude that both can be pre-computed in time linear in N and then used in the computation of xt+1(p), as follows: RELAXEDLOADCOMPUTATION The next step towards SWING algorithm is the relaxation of the load update rule from Algorithm 1: Denote by lt(p) the load after t steps for the walk originating inp. ut(p) =l t(p)ρ(t), where ρ is the modu- lation function from Algorithm 1. Scalar lt(p) should be thought of as a relaxed version of the load after t steps for the walk that originates in the vertex corresponding to vector p. Thus ut(p) is a relaxed version of the additive term from l.5 of Algorithm 1, describing how the value of the entry of the signature vector ξρ, corresponding to vertex j that the walk visits, changes. Instead of explicitly storing and updating N dense N- dimensional signature vectors, requiring Ω(N 2) space and time complexity, we will apply them implicitly, showing an efficient algorithm for computing the action of the kernel matrix K= [ξ ⊤ ρ (i)ξρ(j)]i,j=1,...,N ∈R N×N on a given vector v∈R N . We will show a linear time com- plexity algorithm (in N) for computing K1v and K⊤ 2 v for anyv∈R N . Then, for any given k, it suffices to compute Dψg(pk)vk, in timeO N (1). 2.1 and averaging over m obtained signature vectors (as in l.13 of Algorithm 1), we obtain SWING algorithm for computing the action of the kernel matrix on an arbitrary v∈R N of time complexityO(N T m). STEPFUNCTIONS ANDϵ-NEIGHBORHOODS Let us get back to the step functions considered in the in- troduction (Sec. The final algorithm, leveraging those loads across all steps of the walk is provided in Sec. bY←0∈R N×d v 2:Samplemwalk lenghts:T∼1 + Geom(p halt) 3:forn steps ∈Tdo 4:sampleωandω ′ for RF mapsϕ (ω) f,σ andψ (ω′) g 5:Φ p ←ϕ (ω) f,σ (p)▷precompute evolution RFs 6:Ψ p ←ψ (ω′) g (p)▷precompute load RFs 7:L←Ψ ⊤ p V▷precompute KV for load 8:X 0 ←p▷initialize walkers 9: , nsteps −1do 11:l t ← ρ(t) (1−phalt)t ▷Compute load 12:Φ X ←ϕ (ω) f,σ (Xt−1)▷RFs for evolution 13:X t ←Evolve(Φ X,Φ p,p)▷sample Gumbel, normalize and evolve 14:Ψ X ←ψ (ω′) g (Xt)▷RFs for load distribution 15:Ψ X ←Normalize(Ψ X,Ψ p) 16: EMPIRICALKERNELAPPROXIMATION We first verify that the proposed method provides an unbi- ased estimate of several graph kernels on a set of synthetic 3D point clouds. random walks on graphs’ nodes) via attention-based relaxations, it should lead to even wider adoption of the general class of GRF methods in downstream Machine Learning applica- tions (heavily leveraging modern accelerators). Factorizing Fr ´echet Noise For each p, each point pi in the point cloud, and each time step t, a different sample from the Gumbel distribution should be drawn. However, at each step, all points p would then be biased toward the same point cloud element corresponding to the largest Fr´echet sample. The same qualitative behavior observed for the p-step random walk kernel holds here as well, with substantial inference-time speedups compared to the baseline methods. We also compare against Al Mohy’s algorithm to compute the action of the matrix exponential on a vector. We also compare against Al Mohy and Lanczos (Musco et al.,