REAL METHOD of "Nested Spatio-Temporal Time Series Forecasting" (arXiv 2605.16447v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Furthermore, ex- tensive experiments on multiple high-dimensional datasets demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, validating the effectiveness of future macro-guided nested forecasting. Second, to enable effective multi-scale interaction for temporal forecasting, we introduce a symmetric attention mechanism that facilitates bidirectional information flow across spatio-temporal scales. Early works combined recurrent or temporal convo- lution modules with graph encoders that use fixed topologies to model spatial correlations (Li et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018). At each step, the model predicts a subsequent future patch of length P from the preceding L steps. During training, the model is optimized via single-step supervision on the predicted patch ˆXt+1:t+P . For each node, we compute an averaged rep- resentation within each chunk and define pairwise affinities as Aij = exp  − 1 2σ2 ˜T ˜TX k=1 X(k) i −X (k) j 2 2   ,(1) where X(k) i ∈R Tk denotes the temporal subsequence of node i in chunk k, and σ controls the kernel bandwidth. We then obtain M regions with M < Nby applying K- means clustering to the spectral embeddings, resulting in an assignment matrix S∈ {0,1}N×M . This yields an assign- ment matrix S∈ {0,1}N×M , where Si,m = 1 indicates that node i is assigned to region m. 𝑄 𝐾 𝑉 𝐾 𝑉 Attention Attention Rollout prediction for input Input Prediction Attention ෩𝑯𝑥 ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑑 ෩𝑯𝑧 ∈ ℝ𝑀×𝑑 Raw data Spectral Affinity matrix (spectrally ordered) Centroid features Spectral representation Temporal Encoder Encoder Decoder Decoder affinity projection Assign region Raw data Centroid feature Figure 1.Diagram of NEST. (ii)Training phase:We process historical node signals Xt−L+1:t alongside future regional guidance Zt+1:t+P using decoupled encoders. Given a standard attention operator Attn(Q, K, V), interaction pro- ceeds in two ways. First, a top-down guidance step allows node-level tokens to query regional tokens: Teacher forcing and multi-step ahead rollout.During inference, future regional guidance Zt+1:t+P is unavail- able, whereas training relies on teacher forcing and rollout prediction. During training, a proportion of regional tokens is replaced with zero masks, and a dedicated boundary decoder is trained to recover the missing guidance: Then, building on this initialized boundary ˆZt+1:t+P , we execute a multi-step rollout. This strategy aligns training and inference behavior and stabilizes early rollout steps. Training Objective.The proposed model is trained end- to-end under a multi-task objective that jointly optimizes: The overall loss is defined as L=L x +λ 1Lz +λ 2Lbd,(10) where Lx denotes the node-level forecasting loss, Lz super- vises the multi-quantile predictions of regional dynamics, and Lbd corresponds to the masked guidance reconstruction loss introduced for boundary modeling. Computational Complexity.We analyze the computa- tional complexity with respect to the number of nodes N, regions M (M < N), latent dimension d, and the number of cross-attention layers l. In each layer, the dominant cost arises from cross-attention between node-level and region- level tokens, resulting in a complexity of O(N M d)per layer and O(lN M d)per forward pass. The forecasting task is framed as using 12 historical time steps as input to predict the subsequent 12 steps. Crucially, these forecasts were generated via auto-regressive rollout, using the model’s own predictions step-by-step to align with realistic deployment scenarios where training separate models for every horizon is impractical. For example, on the GLA dataset, the performance gap in our favor expands from 2.0 MAE at step 16 to 2.4 MAE at step 48. (i)w/o CA (no Cross-Attention), which completely removes the cross-attention module, severing the link between regional and nodal representations; and 6 Nested Spatio-Temporal Time Series Forecasting Table 1.Performance comparison on GBA, GLA, and CA datasets.Redindicates the best results, andBlueindicates the second-best results. The row “Improv.” denotes the relative improvement of our method over the best baseline. Unlikew/ KM, which ignores graph topology, orw/ DA, which is limited by static geometry, our method captures functional spatial dependencies, providing a robust foundation for stable regional modeling. While NEST requires an offline preprocessing step for affinity matrix construction and spectral clustering (e.g., 91 seconds on the GBA dataset), this procedure is executed only once. These results demonstrate that the proposed linear cross-attention mecha- nism and patch-wise prediction design effectively constrain computational complexity, making the framework highly efficient in practice. Third, training via future macro-trend recon- struction (teacher forcing) introduces an exposure bias, cre- ating a training-inference gap during autoregressive genera- tion. Then, we define ¯Sm = 1 nk P i∈Cm Si. To prevent overfitting, we employed an early stopping strategy, terminating the training if the validation loss did not decrease for 30 consecutive epochs. Loss Function Definitions Node-level forecasting loss.For node-level prediction, we adopt the Huber loss to balance robustness to outliers and sensitivity to small errors. The node-level loss Lx is computed by averaging the Huber loss over all nodes and prediction horizons. Quantile-based regional forecasting loss.To model predictive uncertainty at the regional level, we predict a set of quantiles {τq}Q q=1 for each region and optimize the corresponding pinball loss. For a given quantileτ∈(0,1) and prediction errore= ˆzτ −z, the pinball loss is defined as ρτ (e) = max(τ e,(τ−1)e).(22) The regional forecasting loss Lz is obtained by averaging the pinball loss across all regions, quantiles, and prediction horizons. Masked guidance reconstruction loss.The masked guidance reconstruction loss Lbd applies the same quantile-based pinball loss to the outputs of the guidance decoder. Empirical periodicity analysis.For each dataset, we conduct a preliminary periodicity analysis on the training split (e.g., via autocorrelation / spectral inspection) and observe a clear dominant period of approximately P= 100 time steps across all three datasets. For each node, we compute an averaged representation within each chunk, and define pairwise affinities by aggregating the chunk-wise distances, as described in Eq. We report the averaged multi-step forecasting performance over all horizons (Steps 1