REAL METHOD of "TFRBench: A Reasoning Benchmark for Evaluating Forecasting Systems" (arXiv 2604.05364v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Le1, Qiang Cheng2, Chun-Liang Li1, Hamid Palangi1, Jinsung Yoon1 and Tomas Pfister1 1Google, 2University of Kentucky WeintroduceTFRBench, thefirstbenchmarkdesignedtoevaluatethereasoningcapabilitiesofforecasting systems. To enable this, we propose a systematic multi-agent frame- work that utilizes an iterative verification loop to synthesize numerically grounded reasoning traces. To address this, we introduceTFRBench, a novel benchmark for reasoning-aware time-series forecasting. We define “reasoning” in this context as a model’s ability to analyze input data across multiple channels, identify and explain interdependencies, and justify significant forecast events based on external context. This architecture orchestrates five agents–Search, Reasoning, Verifier, Forecasting, and Summary–into an iterative generate-verify-refineloop. We define the “Reasoning” here as the derivation of a numerical forecast from causal logic, distinguishing it from tasks such as trading decisions. Similarly, InvestorBench (Li et al., 2025) assesses LLM-based agents on financial decision-making tasks using expansive document retrieval. GIFT-Eval (Aksu et al., 2024) represents a significant step forward in scale, offering 144,000 time series for zero-shot evaluation, yet it remains a numerical benchmark that does not assess interpretability or reasoning quality. As summarized the comparison with existing datasets in Table 1,TFRBenchprovides a multi- domain evaluation suite that demands both accurate forecasting and verifiable, step-by-step reasoning which all datasets fails to provide. Data Creation To ensure a comprehensive and robust evaluation, we design to evalaute reasoning-aware forecasting performance across different data distributions. A Reasoning Benchmark for Evaluating Forecasting Systems Figure 2| Overview of Data Creation System.The pipeline integrates context retrieval, assumption verification, and a feedback loop to align reasoning with forecasting. We further assume access to an external information retrieval mechanism that yields a set of events, denotedE, complementary toXℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡. Unlike standard context- aided methods that implicitly model𝑃( Y|Xℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡,E) , our framework introduces an intermediate latent variable𝑅, denoting a natural languagereasoning trace. first generating 𝑅∼𝑃(𝑅| Xℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡,E) , and subsequently deriving the forecast conditioned on this reasoning, ∼𝑃(Y|𝑅,X ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡). Agent Definitions Search Agent (A𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ).Acting as the grounding module, this agent retrieves and validates external context, and operates in two modes. First asEvent Discovery Module, it identifies significant real- world eventsE (e.g., earnings reports, holidays, or weather events) within the forecasting timeline. To ensure that the retrieved context is well-aligned, the agent is constrained by a hyperparameter to prioritize only the most impactful, domain-relevant events. first as anInitialA𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 that formulates hypotheses based on historical data𝑋ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 and retrieved events, and subsequently as aFinalA𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 that integrates verification reports to produce refined, step-by-step reasoning. It assigns a qualitative consistency score𝑆∈{ 1,..., 5} and acts as a diagnostic module: Iterative Generation Process Our pipeline employs an iterative “generate, verify, and refine” cycle (Algorithm 1) involving five specialized agents. Initially, theA𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ (Event Discovery) retrieves external eventsE (e.g., holidays) and verifies initial assumptions from theA𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 to prevent hallucinations, producing a verification report (𝑉). External Contextualization.Given the historical time-series 𝑋ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡, theA𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ performs a targeted information retrieval to identify external eventsE relevant to the specific domain (e.g., 5 TFRBench: A Reasoning Benchmark for Evaluating Forecasting Systems Algorithm 1Iterative Algorithm forTFRBench Input :History𝑋 ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡, Max Loops𝐾 Output :Best reasoning𝑅 ∗, Summary𝑅𝑠𝑢𝑚, Best Forecastˆ𝑌∗ Variables:Feedback𝐹←∅ for𝑘←1to𝐾do // Step 1: Hypothesis Formulation & Verification 𝐻𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡←A 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛(𝑋ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡,E,𝐹)𝑉←A 𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ.Verify(𝐻𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡) // Step 3: Parallel Candidate Generation {𝑅 1,...,𝑅 𝑛}←A 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛(𝑋ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡,E,𝑉) // Step 4: Joint Evaluation & Scoring for𝑖←1to𝑛do ˆ𝑌𝑖←A 𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑅𝑖,𝑋 ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡)𝑆 𝑖←A 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑓𝑦 .Verify(𝑅𝑖, ˆ𝑌𝑖) end 𝑅∗, ˆ𝑌∗←SelectBest({𝑅 𝑖, ˆ𝑌𝑖,𝑆𝑖})// Select best candidate // Step 5: Feedback-Driven Refinement ifSuccess Criteria Met (MASE<1.0 & High S)then break end 𝐹←A 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑓𝑦 .Diagnose(𝑅∗, ˆ𝑌∗) end // Step 6: This step ensures that subsequent reasoning is conditioned on verified external metadata. Hypothesis Formulation and Verification.To prevent the propagation of false premises, we employ a strict verification method. First, theA𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 acts as an “Initial Reasoning Generator,” formulating a set of explicit assumptions about trends and cross-channel dependencies based on𝑋ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 andE. Each candidate𝑅𝑖 provides a comprehensive, step-by-step narrative that details specific strategies for decomposing the time series into trend, seasonality, and residual components, while explicitly citing the verified external events. We exclude models requiring substantial training data or per-dataset training, such as Autoformer Wu et al. • CoT Forecasting:In this setting, models are prompted to first generate a step-by-step reasoning. Explainable Forecast.Traditional Explainable AI (XAI) methods for time series, such as SHAP or LIME, focus on feature attribution, identifyingwhichpast time steps influenced the prediction (Rojat et al., 2021). Your task is to generate a step-by-step reasoning plan for a downstream forecasting AI. Your first step for each channel MUST be to state your key as- sumptions about its trend, seasonality, event impacts, and relationship to other channels. Your entire response must start immediately with ‘Forecasting Reasoning:’ and follow this exact step-by-step format for each channel: For each assumption, use your search tool to find objective, factual evidence (news articles, official reports, statistics) that either confirms (RIGHT) or denies (WRONG) the assumption. The final plan must be a concrete, step-by-step, channel- specific plan. Verifier Reliability and Calibration A critical component of our architecture is the internal Verifier, which assigns a confidence score 𝑆∈{ 1,..., 5} to generated forecasts. Such a high agreement rate provides strong evidence that our judging rubric is objective and that the resulting performance hierarchy is not an artifact of the evaluator’s architecture. Use the specific rub