REAL METHOD of "Toward Scalable and Valid Conditional Independence Testing with Spectral Representations" (arXiv 2512.19510v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Kernel methods using partial covari- ance operators offer a more principled approach but suffer from limited adaptivity and scalabil- ity. We also introduce a bi-level contrastive algorithm to learn these representa- tions. CI is a fundamental concept in statistics (Dawid, 1979) and 1CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 2DIBRIS, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy 3Faculty of Science, Univer- sity of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia 4CMAP, ´Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France 5Breast Disease Division, University of S ˜ao Paulo, Ribeir˜ao Preto, Brazil 6Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK. Tumor phenotype is known to reflect the underlying molecu- lar state (Thennavan et al., 2021). As a result, while X may correlate with Y , this association can be redundant if the histological patterns encoded in Z already capture the same biological signal. This realization has motivated a shift from designing univer- sally valid tests to methods tailored for particular settings. 1 arXiv:2512.19510v2 [cs.LG] 3 Jun 2026 Toward Scalable and Valid Conditional Independence Testing with Spectral Representations Spectral Representation Learning Compute Statistic & p-Value ⇒ Figure 1.SpectralCIT’s testing pipeline. First the features buθ,bvθ,bwθ are learned using Algorithm 1 with whitening over the training set. Then, the test statistic bTn is computing using Eq. We defer a broader discussion on existing methods to Section 6. Among these approaches, classical kernel-based tests stand out for modeling conditional dependence through the partial covariance operator, whose properties implicitly encode a wide range of structural assumptions on the joint distribu- tion of (X, Y, Z), including smoothness, sparsity, low-rank, and latent variable models. Despite the generality of this operator-based framework, its practical impact has remained limited due to the lack of adaptivity and scalability of kernel methods (Pogodin et al., 2025; Ramdas et al., 2015). Mo- tivated by the above examples and classical kernel CI tests, in this paper we explore whether spectral representation learning can address the limitations of kernel methods for scalable and valid CI testing. In particular, we provide a contrastive learning algorithm to learn the leading spectral features of the partial covariance operator, using them to construct a simple test statistic reminiscent of the Hilbert- Schmidt Independence Criterion (Gretton et al., 2005). We then analyze the behavior of the test statistic under both null and alternative, proving that it converges asymptotically to a chi-squared distribution under the null, and achieves power under the alternative. i.We introduce a simple, scalable algorithm that learns the leading spectral features of the partial covariance operator, overcoming the adaptivity and scalability bottlenecks of classical kernel CI tests. Given a third random variable C, and assuming ΣAB,Σ AC,Σ CB are well-defined, we define the partial cross-covariance operator as4 ΣAB·C =Σ AB −Σ ACΣCB .(3) Partial covariance operators generalize partial covariances and characterize conditional independence ( A⊥ ⊥B|Ciff ∥ΣA(B,C)·C ∥HS = 0; (Strobl et al., 2019)). The corresponding representation learning algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. 4 Toward Scalable and Valid Conditional Independence Testing with Spectral Representations Algorithm 1Bi-level spectral representation learning Input:train setD (train) m ; regularization strengthγ >0 #Learn representations forfort= 1, . , nsteps do #Step inner model fors= 1, . sample from PX,Y,Z , split into train and test sets, D(train) m ={(X i, Yi, Zi)}m i= 1,D (test) n ={(X i, Yi, Zi)}N i=m+ 1. First, Algorithm 1 is applied to D(train) m to learn the feature maps buθ, bvθ, and bwθ. Power of testing with spectral features.Theorem 4.2 characterizes the minimum signal strength ϵn required for our method to reliably detect conditional dependence under the alternative hypothesis. To illustrate this, we evaluate the type I error of our method (SpectralCIT) againstNNLSCITusing a nonsmooth, high-dimensional data model defined as: 500 700 1000 1300 1500 Sample Size 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0T ype I Error Ours NNLSCIT Figure 3.Type 1 error of our method (SpectralCIT) compared to NNLSCITacross varying sample sizes. We proposed a scalable bi- level contrastive algorithm to learn leading spectral features of partial covariance operators, enabling simple linear test statistics while maintaining validity and power. model-X methods depend on knowledge of PX|Z , local permutation methods rely on smoothness, and regression-based approaches require suffi- ciently fast regression estimation. Derivation of Losses and Algorithm for Learning the Partial Covariance Operator In this section, we present the full derivation of the losses and the bi-level contrastive algorithm presented in Section 3. loss form).LetA:G → Fbe a compact operator andγ >0, then the solution of min U,M,V L(U,M,V) +γΩ(U,V), whereL(U,M,V) =∥A−UMV ∗∥2 HS − ∥A∥2 HS Ω(U,V) =∥U ∗U−Id∥ 2 HS +∥V ∗V−Id∥ 2 HS, andU:R d → F,M:Rd →R d,V:R d → Gare linear operators, is given by the rank-dtruncated SVD ofA. To deal with the last term F=Σ Z ¨Y VM∗U∗ΣXZ , we first symmetrize it F= ( F+ F ∗ )/2, and then rely on the fact that tr(F) = tr(WW ∗F), for any linear map W:R 2d →L 2(Z) satisfying W∗W=I 2d and range(F)⊆range(W) , i.e., any orthogonal projector WW∗ onto range(F). The inner loss is the same regularized Hilbert-Schmidt loss as in (11), but applied to learning the finite-rank operatorFwithWNW ∗. Spectral structure of bPθ We define of then×dmatrices bUθ, bVθ and then×(2d)matrix cWθ as follows: Experimental Details Implementation details.To parameterize uθ, vθ, and wθ, we used multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) with n hidden {u,v,w} hidden layers, each containing layer size {u,v,w} neurons. For example,DGCITdoes not expose architectural hyperparameters it in its training algorithm, which limits its adaptivity and our evaluation. The methodsSpectralCIT,RCIT,GCIT, and DGCITwere tuned using Weights & Biases (Biewald, 2020) with method set to bayes and a budget of 30 trials over the hyperparameter grids reported in Tabs. For each trial, bαand bπwere estimated from 20 repetitions under both H0 and H1 for each conditioning dimensiond Z ∈ {50,100,150,200,250,300}, and the resulting values were averaged acrossd Z. 50 100 150 200 250 300 Dimension Z 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0T ype I Error d 2 4 8 12 50 100 150 200 250 300 Dimen