REAL METHOD of "MultiLoReFT: Decoupling Shared and Modality-Specific Subspaces in Multimodal Learning via Low-Rank Representation Fine-Tuning" (arXiv 2607.16789v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

First, collecting large-scale, well-aligned paired multimodal datasets is often impractical, making end-to-end multimodal training difficult. We introduce MultiLoReFT, an efficient and scalable low-rank representation fine-tuning framework for multi- modal learning with pretrained unimodal models. This has motivated recent work to leverage powerful unimodal encoders pretrained on large- scale single-modality data and adapt them for few-shot mul- timodal learning (Alayrac et al., 2022; Kim & Kim, 2024; Miyazawa et al., 2022). We propose MultiLoReFT, a framework that efficiently fuses information from multiple pretrained unimodal encoders while simultaneously disen- tangling shared and unique information from each modal- ity. Coordi- nated representation approaches align unimodal encoders into a shared embedding space, often with contrastive or retrieval-based objectives (Radford et al., 2021). Fusion- based models are widely used, ranging from simple con- catenation or pooling strategies (Baltrušaitis et al., 2019) to attention-based architectures that explicitly capture cross- modal interactions (Tsai et al., 2019; Jayakumar et al., 2020). APOLLO (Zhang et al., 2026) proposes a related alternative based on latent op- timization, learning shared embeddings that are later gener- alized through trained encoders. Building on this, our method introduces an efficient unsupervised multimodal fine-tuning that improves both multimodal performance and interpretability. Multimodal Low-rank Representation Finetuning (MultiLoReFT) We introduce a low-rank representation fine-tuning frame- work for multimodal learning called MultiLoReFT that de- composes pretrained unimodal representations into shared and modality-specific components. As shown in Figure 1, our method operates on top of frozen pretrained encoders, re- quiring only a small number of additional parameters. Representation Fine-tuning with MultiLoReFT We build on representation fine-tuning (Wu et al., 2024) to adapt pretrained unimodal encoders for multimodal learn- ing. Consider two pretrained unimodal encoders E1 and E2 for modalities 1 and 2. Pretrained unimodal encoders (with frozen parameters) produce representations h1 and h2, which are fine-tuned through low-rank projections into shared (Rs) and modality-specific (Rm1, Rm2) subspaces. MultiLoReFT Learning Objective Unlike typical parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods, Mul- tiLoReFT training is not guided by supervised task labels but instead by structural constraints imposed on the repre- sentation space. Lorth =∥R sR⊤ m1∥F +∥R sR⊤ m2∥F.(7) This constraint strengthens disentanglement by ensuring the subspaces are orthogonal. To compute the MI objective consistently, we project both hi and z(i) into a common space using a fixed, non-trainable random projection head, with dimension set to the maximum dimen- sion of the 2 representations. The MI loss and inner product is then computed in this shared space after normalization. During training, we compute the singular value decompo- sition (SVD) of each projection matrix Rs,R m1,R m2 as R=USV ⊤, with singular values S= diag(σ 1,...,σ r). Replace the last linear layer of f with a k- dimensional layer and rotate its weights byU⊤ :,1:k 9:end for 10:R← ˜R 11:end for 3.4. Training Procedure The details of MultiLoReFT training procedure are outlined in Algorithm 2. At the end of each subsequent epoch, the mutual information lossLMI on the validation set is monitored, and a pruning step is triggered only if this loss remains within 1% of its best observed value, ensuring that rank reduction does not substantially degrade representation quality. We define convergence in our experiments as a minimum im- provement of 0.001 in total validation loss within a patience window of 150 epochs. Multimodal datasets (Dtrain,D val); pretrained uni- modal encoders(E 1,E 2); pruning thresholdϵ 1: Φ2←h 2 +R⊤ s ( fs2(h2)−R sh2 ) +R⊤ m2 ( fm2(h2)−R m2h2 ) 7:z s1←R sΦ1,z m1←R m1Φ1 8:z s2←R sΦ2,z m2←R m2Φ2 9:L←GradNorm ( [Lorth,L ind,L mi] ) 10:Train:R s,f s1,f s2,R m1,R m2,f m1,f m2 11:end for 12:Evaluate validation lossesL val onD val 13: We then scale to large, real-world datasets to assess the applicability of our method with pretrained encoders. We compare our method against a broad set of multimodal representation learning frameworks, grouped into two categories: These methods integrate mul- timodal signals through concatenation, attention, or inter- action mechanisms. As baselines, we uselate fusion(Bal- trušaitis et al., 2019), which simply concatenates modality representations, and anattention-based fusion model, which projects each modality into a common space and applies a lightweight self-attention layer to let the two embeddings interact before pooling into a fused represen- tation. We con- siderAPOLLO(Zhang et al., 2026), an autoencoder- based model that decouples shared and unique compo- nents through latent optimization, directly learning em- beddings for training samples before training encoders 5 MultiLoReFT: To ensure fairness and remove the effect of pretrained en- coder selection, all baselines are trained on the same pre- trained unimodal embeddings as input. The only architec- tural differences lie in the method-specific adapters, for example, DRIM-U uses a discriminator-based decoupling module, whereas APOLLO learns latent parameters directly. As shown in Table 3, concatenating fine-tuned representations Φ1 and Φ2 and training a lightweight logistic regressor consistently outper- forms a range of baselines, including disentanglement-based methods and classical fusion strategies such as late fusion, mutual-information–based objectives, and cross-attention. Finally, in Appendix A.5 we analyze the impact of the pretrained encoder quality on multimodal performance, showing that more expressive encoders yield systematically better multimodal representa- tions. This highlights the flexibility of MultiLoReFT which can directly leverage improvements in unimodal pretraining to adapt and enhance multimodal models as more powerful encoders become available. The approach is model-agnostic, parameter-efficient, and operates on top of frozen pretrained unimodal encoders, enabling effective multimodal adaptation without sacrific- ing interpretability. Future work could explore integrating Multi- LoReFT with joint or continual pretraining, scaling to larger multimodal corpora, and developing principled methods to identify and overcome limitations