REAL METHOD of "Neural Control: Adjoint Learning Through Equilibrium Constraints" (arXiv 2605.03288v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

This chal- lenges the single-valued transition assumption underlying many model-learning and planning methods, and makes long-horizon credit assignment brittle (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Suh et al., 2022). Existing implicit-layer methods typically differentiate a sin- gle solver-defined object, such as one optimization layer or KKT system (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Agrawal et al., 2019; Amos et al., 2018), or one fixed point in a deep equilibrium model (Bai et al., 2019). Inspired by adjoint sen- sitivity methods in continuous-depth learning (Chen et al., 2018), we differentiate the equilibrium conditions via an adjoint formulation to compute trajectory-dependent proxy gradients, avoiding unrolling of the inner Newton/CG itera- tions. To further demonstrate that the framework can operate beyond analytical mechanics models, we also eval- uate it on a learned DEQ-style implicit equilibrium model trained from experimental force–strain data. Representative methods include simulta- neous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA) (Spall, 2002), the cross-entropy method (CEM) (Botev et al., 2013), sample-efficient variants such as iCEM (Pinneri et al., 2021), and parameter-space search methods such as evolution strategies (ES) (Salimans et al., 2017) and augmented ran- dom search (ARS) (Mania et al., 2018). Our method retains the stabilizing effect of receding- horizon replanning, but computes trajectory-level sensitivi- ties through the realized implicit rollout, enabling efficient gradient-based optimization. Examples include differentiable optimization layers such as OptNet (Amos & Kolter, 2017) and differentiable convex optimization layers (Agrawal et al., 2019), deep equilibrium models (DEQs) (Bai et al., 2019), differentiable MPC via KKT conditions (Amos et al., 2018), and Pon- tryagin differentiable programming (PDP) (Jin et al., 2020). Inspired by adjoint sensitivity methods for continuous-depth models (Chen et al., 2018), these methods show that gradi- ents can often be obtained without unrolling the full compu- tational procedure. Our setting differs from these methods in that the object being differentiated is not a single optimization layer, fixed point, or KKT system. Terminal Objective.We first consider a terminal loss L=ϕ(x(1),z(1)).(11) Define proxy-system costates a(λ) :=∂L/∂x(λ) and g(λ) :=∂L/∂z(λ) . Adjoints for Trajectory Objectives Many equilibrium-control tasks specify objectives along the realized branch rather than only at λ= 1 . All methods share the same forward equilibrium solver, which computes strip configurations by solving implicit equilibria to convergence at each continuation step. At each continuation step, the forward rollout computes the realized configuration by solving the corresponding equilibrium equations to con- vergence under imposed boundary constraints. Tasks and Metrics We evaluate three numerical tasks that progressively test terminal objectives, trajectory objectives, and multistable shape/branch selection. We define ℓtraj(λ) = 1 2 pmid(λ)−p ⋆ mid(λ) 2 2,(22) and evaluate the trajectory objective Ltraj = Z 1 0 ℓtraj(λ)dλ,(23) implemented as a Riemann sum over realized continuation steps and, for RHC, over the concatenated executed trajec- tory. In Task 2, the controller guides the strip midpoint to follow prescribed nontrivial planar trajectories; the tracked paths closely match the references across all cases, confirming that the method can optimize objectives that depend on intermediate equilibria rather than only the terminal state. All methods share the same forward simulator (implicit equilibrium solves to conver- gence at each continuation step), and the same controller parameterization uΘ(λ) with λ as the sole input. An objective evaluation corresponds to one full rollout that computes the task loss from implicit equilibrium solves. The number of objective evaluations per update is method-dependent: For RHC, an update refers to one optimizer update within the current segment, and all reported losses are computed on the concatenated executed trajectory across segments. all methods reduce the loss early, but the gradient-free base- lines plateau under the fixed update budget. Adjoint Learning Through Equilibrium Constraints Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Figure 4.Optimization steps (iterations) vs. Adjoint+RHC is consistently the most efficient method, achieving substantially lower loss with lower runtime than SPSA and iCEM. First, each state is defined by a converged equilib- rium solve rather than an explicit transition map, making direct backpropagation through all Newton–CG iterations memory- and compute-intensive. Adjoint Learning Through Equilibrium Constraints Impact Statement This work develops methods for learning and control in equilibrium-defined physical systems, with a focus on de- formable object manipulation and compliant structures. An efficient gradient-based algorithm for on-line training of recurrent network trajec- tories.Neural computation, 2(4):490–501, 1990. Proxy dynamics and frozen tangentSince xk is an implicit function of zk, the first-order branch-consistent variation satisfies δxk ≈S k δzk.(33) Using the explicit continuation update (26), we define the discrete proxy transition xk+1 ≈x k + ∆λS kf(z k,u k).(34) Equation (34) is not used to generate the forward trajectory; the forward pass still solves Eq. Adjoint Learning Through Equilibrium Constraints Unified discrete objective.We write terminal and trajectory objectives in the form L=ϕ(x K,z K) + K−1X k=0 wk ℓ(xk,z k),(35) where ϕ is an optional terminal loss and ℓ is an optional running loss. Terminal-only objectives use wk ≡0 ; trajectory objectives set ϕ≡0 if no terminal loss is needed. (41); the running-state loss contribution is first accumulated ina k through Eq. For convenience define the effective continuation adjoint dk :=g k+1 +S ⊤ k ak+1.(42) The control gradient at each step is dL duk ≈∆λB ⊤ k dk.(43) The policy-parameter gradient then follows by the chain rule through the controller: dL dΘ = K−1X k=0  ∂uΘ(λk) ∂Θ ⊤ dL duk .(44) Implementation.Algorithm 1 summarizes the implementation of proxy-adjoint training with receding-horizon continua- tion. proxy-adjoint training with receding-horizon continuation Input:segment horizonH, number of segmentsM, step size∆λ Input:initial(x (0),z (0)), controlleru Θ(λ), continuation dynamicsf(z,u) Input:segment update budgetT seg, optimizer stepOptStep(Θ, dL/dΘ) Helper:StProd(k,v)computesS ⊤ k v: fork= 0toH−1do λ(m)