REAL METHOD of "SpecPrune-VLA: Accelerating Vision-Language-Action Models via Action-Aware Self-Speculative Pruning" (arXiv 2509.05614v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Based on this, we proposeSpecPrune-VLA, a training- free, two-level pruning method with heuristic control.(1) Action-level static pruning.We leverage global history and local attention to stati- cally reduce visual tokens per action.(2) Layer- level dynamic pruning.We prune tokens adap- tively per layer based on layer-wise importance. Accelerating Vision-Language-Action Models via Action-Aware Self-Speculative Pruning Tokenizer Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer K Layer N … Put the wine bottle on top of the cabinet. Instructions Layer 15 … Now Action Multi-view Images Multi-view Images Actions Static Token Pruning at Action LevelLocal Update … Actions Layer 1 Layer 2 … Layer K Layer N … Layer 15 Last Action … Action Head Global Resue Action-aware Controller Dynamic Pruning at Layer Level Figure 2.Overview of SpecPrune-VLA. However, existing token-pruning methods in VLA models (Yang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025) only consider local information (e.g., early layer results in current action generation) and ignore global information (attention of deeper layers) across the whole model, leading to either> 20% success rate loss or limited speedup in some scenarios. Therefore, we reuse the attention information of the global model(the middle layer and deep layer) from the last genera- tion to prune globally unimportant tokens. Our method lead to consistently high speedup across all models and achieves up to1.57× speedup compared with OpenVLA-OFT on the LIBERO simulation benchmark, and 1.70× speedup in real-world tasks, with negligible success rate loss. Self-Speculative Decoding and Lightweight Predictors Unlike standard speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023) requiring a separate draft model, LayerSkip (Elhoushi et al., 2024) uses early layers of the same model for draft- ing and deeper layers for verification, reducing memory and latency. Actions are first generated without execution, then tokens are pruned based on attention scores, and actions are regenerated from the compressed input and executed. Current meth- ods, such as (Li et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025), utilize local information such as the attention score of one LLM layer or the vision encoder. PRUNING BASED ON GLOBAL INFORMATION As illustrated in Section 3.1, in cross-attention layers where visual tokens serve as queries and text tokens as keys, a high attention weight from a visual token Vi to task-instruction (text) tokens indicates that the visual token is important. Formally, let Ah l ∈R (n+m)×(n+m) denote the attention ma- trix of head h at layer l, where the entry Ah l (i, j)represents the attention weight when the i-th token serves as query and the j-th token serves as key. Scorel(Vi) = 1 H·m HX h=1 mX j=1 Ah l (Vi, tj),(2) Then we define Vglobal as the set of the top-Kglobal visual to- kens with the highest such attention scores from the middle and deep layers (we choose the 15th and 32nd layers) in the prior inference step. We observed that 80%–90% of top-k important tokens from the first two lay- ers reappear in the final layer’s top-k (Figure 4II, k=30), indicating early-layer attention provides reliable guidance for token selection. Besides, the first layer alone shows a low hit rate and adding the third layer provides marginal gains with extra latency. Layer-level Dynamic Token Pruning To preserve the most important tokens in layers, we propose dynamic importance scoring mechanism that leverages at- tention scores and layer confidence across LLM layers to prune tokens within layers. s(l) i =ω (l) rank,i ×ω (l) conf (5) where ω(l) rank,i denotesrank-based weightreflecting the to- ken’s relative importance in attention ranking, ω(l) conf denotes layer confidence scoremeasuring the layer’s reliability Rank-based WeightFor each attention head, visual tokens are ranked based on their image-to-text attention scores in (2). Layer Confidence ScoreInspired by (Zhang et al., 2025b), in Transformer layers, high attention entropy indicates a dispersed attention distribution, where the model fails to concentrate on salient tokens. As shown in Figure 4I, we observe that the attention entropy across layers in our VLA model varies significantly with depth, suggesting that dif- ferent layers contribute unequally to identifying globally important information. Let A(l) ij denote the attention weight from text query token i to image key token j in layer l of the image-to-text attention. We then compute the layer confidence scoreω (l) conf as: This value is computed in the first inference step and reused thereafter due to high inter-step similarity (see Appendix A.4). by detecting whether a step requires fine or coarse con- trol, our method preserves more tokens during fine-grained phases and prunes more aggressively during coarse-grained ones, improving both efficiency and success rate. Compared to FastV and DivPrune (both retaining similar token counts with our method for fair- ness), our method achieves comparable speedup but superior SR. FastV prunes tokens using early-layer attention without training, ignoring global context; DivPrune maximizes fea- ture diversity but neglects task-relevant token importance in VLA models. spatio-temporal coherence in robotic tasks makes previous- step global attention a reliable prior for the current inference step. Conclusion In this paper, we proposedSpecPrune-VLA, a training-free acceleration framework that leverages action-aware self- speculative pruning to combine global temporal consistency with local layer-wise importance. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the robust generalizability of our method across diverse VLA architectures(OpenVLA-OFT, DB-OFT, Co- gACT) andmultiple hardware platforms(NVIDIA A800, RTX 3090/4090). EXPERIMENT ONCOGACT In this section, we implement our method on CogACT, a model with another popular architecture. While combining with static caching (SC), cache interval = 5 in action expert, our method achieves 1.42× speedup with negligible loss in success rate. Our method achieves a 1.32× speedup over this FlashAttention baseline. In Figure 13, we profile the latency of both eager attention and flash attention under different input token number and 30% sparsity (same with our method). The overeall algorithm of action-aware pruning To clearly illustrate the control flow of our action-aware controller and pruning method, we present in Algorithm 1. For each layer of the LLM, the input is the visual tokens from the previous layer (or initial input), and the output is the prun