REAL METHOD of "Knowledge Diversion for Efficient Morphology Control and Policy Transfer" (arXiv 2512.09796v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, such architectures incur substantial computational costs, resulting in high deployment overhead, and existing methods exhibit limited cross-task generalization, necessitating training from scratch for each new task. To this end, we proposeDivMorph, a modular training paradigm that leverages knowledge diversion to learn de- composable controllers. DivMorph factorizes ran- domly initialized Transformer weights into factor units via SVD prior to training and employs dy- namic soft gating to modulate these units based on task and morphology embeddings, separating them into sharedlearngenesand morphology- and task-specifictailors, thereby achieving knowledge disentanglement. Consequently, standard RL pipelines *Equal contribution 1School of Computer Science and En- gineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2Key Labora- tory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Min- istry of Education, China. (b) DivMorph lever- ages knowledge diversion to train a modular network that decou- ples shared, morphology-specific, and task-specific components, enabling adaptive recomposition for universal morphology control with 3ˆ higher sample efficiency on new tasks, and 17ˆ smaller deployment models for a given agent morphology. train from scratch for each morphology–task pair, lacking adaptive generalization mechanisms (Singh et al., 2022). Building on this principle, we introduce DivMorph, which brings knowledge diversion into uni- versal morphology control (Fig. By disentangling shared (i.e., morphology- and task-agnostic) knowledge from morphology- and task-specific components during training, DivMorph enables effective cross-task policy trans- fer for unified morphology control via transferable common knowledge, and efficient deployment for specific agent mor- phologies with significantly reduced model size. To enable knowledge decoupling across morphologies and tasks in transformer-based controllers, DivMorph first de- composes each randomly initialized weight matrix W via Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) as W“UΣV J. Each singular vector pair pui, viq in U and V is treated as a factor unit and assigned to one of three categories: During knowledge diversion, the singular values Σ are modulated by morphology- and task-aware gates, which control the recombination of factor units based on task embeddings from textual instructions encoded via a pretrained text encoder and morphology embeddings de- rived from each agent’s limb joint configuration using a dedicated morphology encoder. To improve parameter shar- ing and generalization, DivMorph replaces conventional bi- nary gating (Xie et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025) with dynamic soft gates that assign soft weights to tailors in a mixture-of- experts style (Zhou et al., 2022), enabling modular reuse and zero-shot generalization to novel morphologies and tasks. To evaluate both morphology- and task-level generalization, we con- struct 100 agent morphologies and 5 tasks each for training and testing, following (Gupta et al., 2021; 2022). Remark- ably, DivMorph achieves state-of-the-art performance, offer- ing 3ˆ higher sample efficiency than direct fine-tuning for new task transfer, while reducing model size by 17ˆ during deployment for a given agent morphology, comparable to an MLP controller, demonstrating its effectiveness for scalable and flexible policy reuse. 1) We propose DivMorph, the first modular training paradigm for universal morphol- ogy control, enabling flexible recomposition for efficient policy deployment. 2) We introduce a dynamic soft gating mechanism that effectively models tasks and morphologies, enabling enhanced universal control and robust zero-shot policy generalization. Importantly, existing methods achieve modest morphology-level generalization but remain task- specific, requiring retraining for each new task. In contrast, we propose DivMorph, which applies knowledge diversion during training to disentangle morphology-specific and task- specific components, enabling efficient control across mor- phologies and flexible policy transfer across tasks. Early learngene-based ap- proaches typically condensed task-agnostic knowledge at the layer level. GRL (Feng et al., 2025a) leveraged evo- 2 Knowledge Diversion for Efficient Morphology Control and Policy Transfer lutionary strategies, while Heur-LG (Wang et al., 2022b) and Auto-LG (Wang et al., 2023a) relied on heuristics or meta-learning, and other variants (Feng et al., 2025c; Xia et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024) imposed structural constraints to regulate parameter sharing. Although effective, these methods offer limited knowledge disentanglement, limiting adaptability in multi-task and cross-domain scenarios. The goal is to learn a universal policy πθpaκ,t|s κ,t, cκq that maximizes the average return across all training morphologies: In addition to maximizing returns on the training morphologies and tasks, we require the universal policy πθ to efficiently control unseen mor- phologies κ˚Rt1, . , Tu, enabling zero-shot deployment and cross- task transfer with minimal training. At each time step t, limb i of robot κ receives the concatena- tion of its proprioceptive observation si κ,t and morphology context ci κ, which is projected into a node embedding ei via a shared linear layer. The set of node embeddingsteiuNκ i“1 is processed by a transformer encoder to capture inter-limb interactions, where each layer comprises a multi-head self- attention (MSA) followed by a feed-forward network (FFN). In the MSA module, each attention head computes query, key, and value vectors from the node embeddings via learn- able linear projections: qi “W qei, ki “W kei and vi “W vei, where Wq, Wk, Wv PR Dˆd are trainable projection matrices, D is the embedding dimension, and d is the head dimension. Self-attention is then performed as Ai“softmax ´ QiKJ i? d ¯ Vi, A iPR Nˆd ,(1) where Qi “ rqi 1, . For a multi-head attention module with h heads, the outputs of all heads are concatenated and projected via a learnable matrixW oPR hdˆD: , AhqWo.(2) The FFN consists of two linear transformations Win P RDˆD1 andW outPR D1ˆD with a GELU activation: If global exteroceptive observations (e.g., a terrain height map or target goal) are available, they are encoded via a MLP and concatenated with the node embeddings to form enriched features. 3 Knowledge Diversion for Efficient Morphology Control and Policy Transfer Flat t