REAL METHOD of "VGGT-Motion: Motion-Aware Calibration-Free Monocular SLAM for Long-Range Consistency" (arXiv 2602.05508v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Specifically, we first propose a motion-aware submap construction mechanism that uses optical flow to guide adap- tive partitioning, prune static redundancy, and en- capsulate turns for stable local geometry. We then design an anchor-driven direct Sim(3) registration strategy. 246 s Figure 1.Comparison of the SOTA method VGGT-Long (Deng et al., 2025) and our VGGT-Motion across sequences with varying frame counts. These models enable calibration-free recon- struction from raw image data, making SLAM in uncon- strained environments a tangible possibility (Murai et al., 2025). However, the quadratic complexity (O(N 2)) of their Transformer-based architectures imposes severe memory constraints and computational bottlenecks, rendering direct deployment on long-horizon sequences infeasible. To this end, some methods adopt divide-and-conquer strate- gies, such as sliding windows (Maggio et al., 2025) or sim- ple chunking (Deng et al., 2025). However, in the context of Transformer architectures, these rigid windowing strategies frequently fragment criti- cal maneuvers, such as sharp turns, into disparate submaps, disrupting the global self-attention mechanism, which is essential for maintaining geometric consistency. While inte- grated sequences leverage a unified attention field for robust rotation and scale estimation, fragmented submaps lose this global geometric context, leading to inconsistent local tra- jectories and scale jumps at sequence boundaries. This redundancy streams further amplifies the quadratic O(N 2) cost of self- attention (Dosovitskiy, 2020), motivating adaptive filtering to retain informative frames while pruning redundancy. Specifically, we first introduce a motion- aware submap construction module that leverages optical flow to segment sequences into static, turning, and linear regimes. Next, to address alignment biases caused by contextual asymmetry, we develop an anchor-driven direct Sim(3) registration module. Experiments on five diverse datasets show that our method achieves high-fidelity trajectory consistency and exceptional efficiency. Learning- based SLAM methods, including DROID-SLAM (Teed & Deng, 2021) and DPVO (Teed et al., 2023), enhance ro- bustness through dense correspondence learning and dif- ferentiable matching within optimization-based pipelines. However, both classical and learned variants often assume known camera calibration, limiting their utility in uncon- strained outdoor video processing (Taketomi et al., 2017). DUSt3R (Wang et al., 2024) en- ables calibration-free reconstruction via large-scale pretrain- ing, MASt3R (Leroy et al., 2024) introduces 3D-grounded matching, and FAST3R (Yang et al., 2025) improves infer- ence speed within the same batch paradigm. VGGT (Wang et al., 2025a) further integrates pose, intrinsics, and feature tracks within a Transformer architecture. For submap alignment, VGGT infers local dense geometry, and an anchor-driven strategy directly estimates Sim(3) constraints. zero-shot generalization and local consistency, these mod- els remain limited to short-sequence batch inference due to quadratic self-attention (Dosovitskiy, 2020; Deng et al., 2025), restricting scalability to long trajectories. One line adopts streaming architectures with causal attention or incremental inference (Lan et al., 2025; Zhuo et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025), extending temporal horizons but remaining susceptible to catastrophic forget- ting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) and drift. Method Given a monocular image sequence, our goal is to recover a globally consistent trajectory and dense geometry. We first construct motion-aware submaps that segment the sequence into reliable regimes and infer local geometry with the foun- dation model VGGT. Then, we develop an anchor-driven direct Sim(3) registration algorithm to align submaps and optimize their poses. (i)zero-motion driftduring stop-and-go periods, where aligning noisy quasi-static pre- dictions accumulates spurious motion; and (ii)rotation- induced fragmentation, where arbitrary cuts during turns disrupt attention context and scale consistency. Motion State Estimation.To quantify camera dynamics, we compute dense optical flow Ft : m(t) turn = 1 |Ω| X u∈Ω |fx,t(u)|.(2) After temporal Gaussian smoothing is applied to obtain the profiles Sstatic(t) and Sturn(t), a hierarchical classi- fier assigns each frame a discrete state s(t)∈ {S, T, L}, representingStatic, Turning, and Linearregimes: First, in static inter- vals, sensor and environmental noise triggers “hallucinated movement” and zero-motion drift because the model fails to decouple noise from motion. • Static Redundancy Pruning.For static intervals, only the boundary frames (first and last) are retained. • Adaptive Linear Slicing.For linear motion, a maximum frame budget Nmax controls submap length, balancing memory constraints with local geometric fidelity. The detailed partitioning procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1 in the Appendix. Upon loop detec- tion, Lk incorporates historical frames retrieved from past submaps via SALAD features (Koo et al., 2023) and injected into the current queue. Each augmented submap sequence Mk is then fed to the VGGT model to produce a coherent geometric set: In contrast, we derivedense, search-freegeometric correspondences from VGGT point maps to impose robust Sim(3) constraints. Zero-Shot Generalization & Scalability To evaluate the generalization capabilities of our method in unseen scenarios, we employ three large-scale datasets—4Seasons, Complex Urban, and A2D2. In contrast, our method delivers substantially more precise and robust trajectory estimation, with an85–95% reduction in both ATE and Drift over VGGT-Long. To isolate effects, we adopt an incremental ablation protocol in which modules are added in pipeline order, with each stage initialized from the best configuration of the previous step. Our method exhibits long-range consistency across various challenging scenarios, whereas baseline methods fail. As shown in Figure 6, our submap alignment method consistently outperforms the baseline method in both performance and efficiency. Motion-Aware Submap Partitioning Algorithm To stabilize optimization and reduce redundancy, we propose a motion-aware partitioning strategy that leverages camera dynamics (static/linear/turning). Keep only boundary frames for anchoring.} 16:ifIsStaticBoundary(t,S, ω)then 17:δ t ←True{retain boundary frames in static segments} 18:end if 19:else 20:{In dynamic 