REAL METHOD of "ManiSoft: Towards Vision-Language Manipulation for Soft Continuum Robotics" (arXiv 2605.18617v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To investigate these challenges, we introduceMan- iSoft, a benchmark for vision-language manipu- * Equal contribution.⋄Project lead.†Corresponding au- thor. lation with soft arms.ManiSoftfeatures a tai- lored simulator that couples realistic soft-body dynamics with contact-rich interactions via an elastic force constraint. To support policy training and evaluation,ManiSoft includes an automated pipeline that generates 6,300diverse scenes and corresponding expert trajectories. To produce high-quality trajectories at scale, we first employ a high-level planner to decompose each task into a sequence of way- points, followed by a low-level reinforcement learning policy that generates torque commands to track waypoints. To date, most benchmarks (Liu et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2021; Mees et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024b; Srivastava et al., 2022) and methods (Chi et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025b; Kim et al., 2024; 2025) focus on rigid robotic arms, where accu- rate proprioception and low-dimensional kinematics enable straightforward perception-to-control pipelines. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), when obstacles require signif- icant shape adaptation, a rigid arm may fail to reach the target due to its joint constraints. In this work, we introduceManiSoft, a benchmark designed to catalyze vision-language manipulation research for soft arms.ManiSoftprovides (i) a simulation and rendering stack for soft-arm manipulation, (ii) a suite of language- conditioned tasks with diverse scenes, and (iii) expert demonstration trajectories to support imitation and offline reinforcement learning. To bridge this gap, we integrate a soft-body dy- namics simulator (Naughton et al., 2021) with a rigid-body interaction simulator (Todorov et al., 2012) through an elas- tic force constraint, facilitating contact-rich manipulation with a soft arm. For each task, we follow the auto- mated pipeline in Figure 1 (c) to generate tabletop scenes and expert trajectories. We first construct clean (uncluttered) scenes by sampling target objects from the asset library and then create randomized variants by adding obstacles and varying object placements and textures, enabling systematic evaluation under increas- ing visual and physical complexity. For each scenario, we generate expert trajectories using a hierarchical mechanism. This de- composition mitigates the difficulty of directly producing torque sequences and yields stable trajectories for training. We hope ManiSoftwill serve as a testbed for developing methods that address these challenges. RT-1 (Brohan et al., 2023b) and RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023a) demonstrate the effectiveness of large-scale training by leveraging multi-robot datasets. OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) presents an open-source framework built upon large language models and pretrained visual encoders, while CogACT (Li et al., 2024a) proposes an action module conditioned on VLM outputs to improve action prediction. More recently, theπseries (Black et al., 2025b;a; Amin et al., 2025) has demonstrated strong performance via large-scale pretraining followed by reinforcement learning. Despite this progress, prior VLA methods have been predominantly developed and evaluated on rigid arms. Interaction between soft body and EEF is represented via an an elastic force constraint. TheManiSoftBenchmark We introduce theManiSoftbenchmark, designed to sup- port vision-language manipulation with soft robotic arms. To enable scalable data col- lection, we propose an automated data generation pipeline that integrates procedural scene construction with a hierar- chical expert trajectory generation mechanism. These components are linked via an elastic force constraint to ensure coordinated yet compliant motion. External actuation torquesτ e ∈R N×3 induce axial, shear, bending, and torsional strains along the rod, producing in- ternal forcesf i ∈R N×3 and momentsτ i ∈R N×3 . To couple the soft body and the end-effector, we impose an elastic force constraint. Relative translations∆x∈R 3 and ro- tations∆θ∈R 3 between the attachment points generate restoring forceF∈R 3 and torqueM∈R 3, computed according to Hooke’s law: Formally, at each time stept∈N +, given an instruction Land the current visual observationV t, the policy model predicts the next actionA t = (τ e, S). (i) success rate, deter- mined by task-specific criteria, and (ii) efficiency, mea- sured as the number of steps required for completion. COLL High Level Plan Low Level Action Human Defined Rules (c) Executor Figure 4.Trajectory generation pipeline inManiSoft.(a) An executor is trained via RL policy to transform waypoint (6-DoF pose) into torques. (c) Task-specific rules are predefined to produce high-level planning (trajectory waypoints) for each case, which are then converted into low-level actions (torque commands) by the executor to generate complete trajectories. For each object, we pre-annotate a set of suitable 6-DoF end-effector poses for interaction with the soft arm (e.g., approach, grasp, and lift candidates). In the randomized set- ting, we introduce additional irrelevant objects as obstacles to enhance spatial complexity, and apply scene randomiza- tion by sampling diverse textures along with variations in lighting intensity and brightness. Direct LLM sampling often produces variable phrasing or minor hallucinations; therefore, we first generate candi- date instructions via GPT, manually curate and refine them into a template library, then instantiate templates by fill- ing in object attributes (e.g., color, shape, material). Given the procedurally generated scenes for each task, we produce expert trajectories using a hierarchical mech- anism, as illustrated in Figure 4. These waypoints encode seman- tically intermediate configurations (e.g., approach, grasp, retract) tailored to the task, avoiding the need for direct torque-sequence planning over long horizons. At the low level, an RL-trained executor drives the soft arm from its current configuration to each successive waypoint using torque actuation. At each timestept, the executor receives the following inputs: The executor is trained with a dense reward function that encourages precise reaching of the target waypoint while promoting stable convergence and penalizing excessive de- formation or oscillation. We define the total rewardRas the sum of two terms: As shown in Figure 6, the model trained withR s exhibits notice- ably smaller fluctuations in pose difference compared to the model trained with