REAL METHOD of "DexMachina: Functional Retargeting for Bimanual Dexterous Manipulation" (arXiv 2505.24853v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

an object is first driven automatically towards its target states, such that the policy can gradually learn to take over under motion and contact guidance. We release a simulation benchmark with a diverse set of tasks and dexterous hands, and show that DexMachina significantly outperforms base- line methods. Our algorithm and benchmark enable a functional comparison for hardware designs, and we present key findings informed by quantitative and quali- tative results. Our proposed algorithm, DexMachina, achieves functional retargeting from one human demonstration to a variety of existing dexterous hand embodiments over a range of articulated objects. Yet the reality presents many hardware and algorithmic challenges that bottleneck the progress in dexterous manipulation. Prior learning-based methods have seen success in relatively simple and short-horizon tasks, but are often limited by manual reward-engineering [1, 2] or costly data-collection [3, 1] due to the embodiment gap between human hands and dexterous hands. arXiv:2505.24853v1 [cs.RO] 30 May 2025 given a human demonstration, the goal is to learn dexterous hand policies that can manipulate the object to follow the demonstrated trajectory (see Fig. To address these challenges, we propose DexMachina 1, a novel curriculum-based RL algorithm for functional retargeting. The policy first learns to mimic the human motion without worrying about failing the task, then learns to take over manipulation as the virtual controllers fade away. On this benchmark, we empirically show that DexMachina significantly outperforms baseline methods, and applies successfully to a wide variety of hands, articulated objects, and long-horizon demonstrations. With an effective algorithm and evaluation benchmark for functional retargeting, it is now possible to make functional comparisons across different hardware: our algorithm requires no hand-specific adaptations, and our task environments are fast to run and easy to customize. We propose DexMachina, a novel algorithm for functional retargeting based on a curriculum over virtual object controllers and motion and contact guidance. • We introduce the DexMachina benchmark with 6 curated dexterous hand assets and 5 articulated objects, for evaluating both different functional retargeting algorithms and robotic hand designs. Our simulation environments and learning algorithms will be open-sourced to facilitate future research. Model-based methods have been applied to tasks such as ball dribbling [ 8] and Rubik’s cube turning [ 9], but they require careful engineering for each object and task. Some prior work uses this approach to relax physical constraints, such as allowing force before making contact [ 42] or relaxing gravity, friction and constraint-solver parameters [36]. At any timestep t, given an achieved object state ˆgt (position, rotation, and articulation) and the target object state from the demonstration gt = {gP t , gR t , gJ t }, we denote the distance function as F (computes both rotation, position, and articulation joint error). We propose DexMachina, a curriculum-based RL algorithm for functional retargeting. At each timestep t, write Gt = {gP t , gR t , gJ t } for the recorded object position, rotation and joint angles at timestep t, and ˆGt = {ˆgP t , ˆgR t , ˆgJ t } for the object’s achieved states corresponding to each term. We then introduce an auto-curriculum using virtual object controllers, which initially moves the object on its own to follow the demonstration, and are then decayed over the course of RL training as the policy learns to take over manipulation. Given Dη with T timesteps, N object parts, and a dexterous hand ζ with J actuated joints and K collision links, we first run a kinematics-only retargeting algorithm [3] that matches dexterous hand poses with human hand motion. At the beginning of curriculum training, we set high virtual controller gains with critical damping; then we exponentially decay the gains based on the policy’s learning progress, which is tracked with a history of past rewards. Due to various differences in physics simulation and training configurations, we re-implement baseline methods in our training framework and make several adaptations to ensure a fair comparison — see § B.3 for implementation details. We present empirical results that (1) evaluate the effectiveness of DexMachina against baselines and no-curriculum settings (§ 5.1); (2) ablate key components of our method (§ 5.2); (3) demonstrate DexMachina’s applicability across various dexterous hand embodiments and utility as an evaluation framework for comparing different hand designs (§5.3). We compare between direct replay of kinematic retargeting results (“Kinematic Only"), training with only a task reward (“Task Rew (ObjDex)", i.e., our re-implementation of ObjDex [35]), training with both task and auxiliary rewards (“Task + Aux Reward"), and with our proposed auxiliary rewards and curriculum (“Ours"). We train in the no-curriculum setting, use a subset of tasks and hands and average over three seeds for each method. This limitation can be addressed with either vision-based RL policy training [ 2], or more practically, a distillation setup that trains visuomotor policies using demonstration data generated from state-based policies, as seen in prior work [ 35]. In Computer Vision, ACCV 2012 - 11th Asian Conference on Computer Vision, Revised Selected Papers, number PART 1 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), pages 548–562, 2013. To address this, we run the simu- lation for each pair of dexterous hands, and for each demonstrated timestep, we fixate the ob- ject to its target state (both root pose and object joint angle), and set retargeted joint values as control targets. let L = {ℓm}K m=1 be the center positions of the dexterous hand links, for each contact point vc k ∈ C, assign it to the nearest link: m∗ = arg minm ∥vc k − ℓm∥2 For each link ℓm, compute the average position of the assigned contacts: The exact same procedure is repeated for each dexterous hand, hence each bi-manual RL task environment has two copies of contact information with the same shapes. 15 B Experiment Details B.1 RL Training and Evaluation Details We use Genesis for physics simulation [ 45] and PPO as the base RL algorithm implemented by the rl-games [ 47] package. In the reported results for both ours and baseline