REAL METHOD of "CorrectionPlanner: Self-Correction Planner with Reinforcement Learning in Autonomous Driving" (arXiv 2603.15771v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We train the planner with imitation learn- ing followed by model-based reinforcement learn- ing using rollouts from a pretrained world model that realistically models agents’ reactive behav- iors. Instead of reasoning in natural language, our method performs self- correction at the motion token level, discretized from trajec- tories. Specifically, at each planning step, the policy (plan- ner) first autoregressively generates an ego motion token given the agents’/ego’s history, map/navigation information, and predicted agent motions, and then a learned collision critic evaluates whether it will cause a collision within a short horizon (e.g., 2.5s). The policy retains the sequence of all unsafe motion tokens and repeatedly generates new tokens based on this sequence, which is encoded by a self-attention block. In contrast, our method trained with RL has the ability to self-correct and refine the proposed motion token in an autoregressive manner, avoiding unsafe trajectories. In contrast, our method uses RL to endow the model with self- correction ability, using rollout trajectories with correction tokens and rule-based rewards through two-stage training. Naive solutions include 1) replay log trajectories for the agents and 2) predict the future trajectories for all the timesteps first, and then plan the ego, like diffusion planner (Zheng et al., 2025). This yields a discrete 1024-token vocabulary, where each token encodes a one- step change in position and heading. Architecture.The world model is a transformer decoder with spatio-temporal attention as shown in Figure 3 (a). Mo- tion tokens are first fused with vehicle information, includ- ing speed, size, and other factors, and then processed by six attention blocks. (1) Temporal self-attention, modeling motion continuity and capturing each agent’s long-range dependencies across the time horizon; (2) Agent-map cross-attention, which incor- porates spatial constraints by attending to road elements, ensuring adherence to the road network, and reducing off- road behavior; (3) Agent-agent cross-attention, which mod- els interactions with surrounding agents to simultaneously predict the future behavior of agents. To maintain rotation and translation invariance, relative spatio-temporal position embeddings and the distances between agents, the ego, and map tokens are applied to all attention modules. Loss.The model is trained with a next-token prediction objective with cross-entropy loss for all agents: Once pretrained, the world model is frozen during later RL training and used as a ”simulator” within our RL loop to reactively sample trajectories for policy optimization and self-correction. Method In this section, we present our method for detecting unsafe motions and refining them through an iterative correction trace. We first describe the policy network for generating ego motions, then show how we conduct self-correction, and finally introduce our two-stage training scheme: As shown in Figure 3 (a), the policy consists of a stack of cross-attention modules: (i) a route/navigation cross- attention layer, (ii) a temporal self-attention layer over the ego trajectory, (iii) an ego-map cross-attention layer that incorporates map context, and (iv) an ego-agent interaction layer that models the ego’s interactions with other agents. When self-correction is triggered, previously rejected proposals are retained as acorrection traceand integrated via a self-attention encoder to condition subsequent proposals, providing an explicit correction signal during both imitation learning and RL.(b) Self-correction. policy is trained with the next-token prediction objective on expert trajectories: The policy then generates the next proposal distribution with the correction trace, which is encoded by a self-attention layer, and the final accepted token is the one executed. Self-correction in imitation learning.Although RL further strengthens self-correction, we train the imitation stage to explicitly exposethe policy to collision scenarios so it learns how to revise unsafe predictions during IL. Specif- ically, we retain all previously proposed (unsafe) tokens as a sequence, encode them with self-attention to obtain a fused representation, and generate the next corrected motion token ˆsego t,c+1, conditioning the policy on all the previously proposed unsafe actions. The objective of the correction in IL is to minimize the cross-entropy loss between each proposed action in the correction trace and the expert trajec- tories: Thus, we propose using reinforcement learning to further train the policy and learn a collision critic that can correct unsafe motions in advance via self-correction. At each planning step, the ego policy first proposes a motion token, and the collision critic evaluates its collision risk within the horizon k. Training the Collision Critic To effectively detect future collisions for both RL training and inference, we train a critic (a binary classifier) to pre- dict whether a collision will occur using rollout trajectory data from the policy and world model. (i) a temporal self-attention layer over the ego and agents’ trajectory, (ii) an ego-agent interaction layer that models the ego’s interactions with other agents. The training objective is to minimize the cross- entropy loss: Experiment In this section, we evaluate our method on the WOMD (Ettinger et al., 2021) with the Waymax simulator (Gulino et al., 2023) powered by LatentDrive (Xiao et al., 2025) and the nuPlan dataset(Caesar et al., 2021). We also conduct various ablation studies to further validate our method. Experimental Setup We evaluate our method in reactive and non-reactive modes: Main Results Waymax Simulation.In Table 1, we see that under both modes, our method achieves thelowest collision rate, re- 5 CorrectionPlanner: Our method reduces the collision rate by over 20%. While LatentDrive has the highest progression rate, our method maintains a similar progression ratewhile significantly improving safety, sug- gesting a favorable safety-efficiency trade-off. Overall, our method shows consistently better performance across all settings ex- cept in the Test-Hard NR setting, where SMART performs the best. Our method achieves a lower collision rate than SMART while maintaining similar per- formance on other metrics, demonstrating its effectiveness and a slight trade-off in those metrics, even though we only optimize the progression and safety reward in RL training. COMPAR