REAL METHOD of "PostTrainBench: Can LLM Agents Automate LLM Post-Training?" (arXiv 2603.08640v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Can LLM Agents Automate LLM Post-Training? Ben Rank∗ 1 2 3 Hardik Bhatnagar∗ 4 3 Ameya Prabhu 4 3 Shira Eisenberg† 5 Nguyen Karina 5 Matthias Bethge 4 3 Maksym Andriushchenko 1 2 3 ç Leaderboard Code Abstract AI agents have become surprisingly proficient at software engineering over the past year, largely due to im- provements in reasoning capabilities. can these systems extend their capabil- ities to automate AI research itself? In this paper, we explore post-training, the critical phase that turns base LLMs into useful assistants. We introduce POSTTRAINBENCH to benchmark how well LLM agents can perform post-training autonomously under bounded compute constraints (10 hours on one H100 GPU). training on the test set, downloading existing instruction-tuned checkpoints instead of training their own, and using API keys they find to generate synthetic data without authorization. Overall, we hope POSTTRAINBENCH will be useful for tracking progress in AI R&D automation and for studying the risks that come with it. Why post-training? We study a central yet tractable com- ponent of modern AI research and development: Post-training refers to the process of taking a pretrained LLM and systematically improving it through supervised fine-tuning, reinforcement learning from hu- man feedback, and related alignment and capability- enhancement methods. advances in post-training have been responsible for major gains in safety , instruction following, tool use, and reasoning. Despite this, no exist- ing benchmark measures the ability of frontier LLM agents to perform post-training itself. T o address this gap, we introduce POST- TRAINBENCH, where each evaluation pairs a base LLM (Qwen3-1.7B, Qwen3-4B, SmolLM3-3B, or Gemma-3-4B) with a target benchmark for the agent to optimize (AIME 2025, GSM8K, GPQA, HumanEval, BFCL, ArenaHard, or HealthBench). they may write and execute code, search for and curate train- ing data, and select any post-training strategy. These results suggest that current agents can execute focused post-training successfully but do not yet match the broad, general-purpose post-training achieved by teams of expert scientists and engineers. The agent must build its training pipeline from scratch – we provide no starter code, training data, or hyperparameter configura- tions. Agents have full autonomy over data sources, training methods, and hyperparameters. In POSTTRAINBENCH the agents are only constrained to not use benchmark test data for training (data contamination) or substitute a different model than provided. Agent Architecture The Agent consists of a scaffold, which behaves as the soft- ware layer and an underlying frontier model, which forms the underlying reasoning engine. Can LLM Agents Automate LLM Post-Training? Agent post-trains LLM Inputs: An agent receives a base LLM, target benchmark, and 10 hours on one H100 GPU, then post-trains the model to maximize performance. Example Execution Trace T o illustrate how agents ap- proach post-training tasks, we present a condensed execu- tion trace from Claude Opus 4.5 using the Claude Code scaffold, post-training Gemma-3-4B-PT for HumanEval (Figure 3). Can LLM Agents Automate LLM Post-Training? Opus 4.5 post-trains Gemma3-4B-Base for HumanEval [Turns 1^-11: First Training ^^- Times Out] >> python train.py --epochs 2 --batch-size 4 ^^= Total training examples: reduce to 20K samples, increase batch size" >> python train.py --epochs 1 --batch-size 8 --max-samples 20000 Training completes successfully [Turns 66^-80: Gemini 3/3.1 Pro (OpenCode) costs $225–310, Claude Opus 4.5 (OpenCode) ∼$250, and GLM-5 (Z.AI) ∼$170. Almost all agent-trained models are below random chance of 25% on GPQA after post-training, while AIME2025 and ArenaHard-Writing have a marginal performance improvement to 5% and 10% respectively. The agents’ success demonstrates that targeted optimization can outperform broad training on narrow metrics, but does not imply agents can repli- cate the full post-training pipeline that produces versatile instruction-following assistants. Post-Training Method Selection We analyzed the training scripts generated by each agent to characterize their post-training strategies. Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is the overwhelmingly dominant post-training method across all agents. Every agent uses SFT as its primary approach, implemented via either TRL ’s SFTTrainer or Hugging- Face’s base Trainer with a causal language modeling ob- jective. This unifor- mity is notable given that agents had full autonomy to im- plement any training algorithm. Most task directories contain multiple versioned training scripts ( train.py, train_v2.py, …, up to train_v10.py), indicating that agents refine data prepara- tion, hyperparameters, and formatting across successive at- tempts. This suggests that current agents treat post- training method selection as largely settled (defaulting to SFT) and invest their effort budget in data curation and hy- perparameter tuning instead. “ avoid leaking evaluation data ” and “ avoiding test contamination.” Mostly the agents sourced training data from alternative datasets (MBPP , glaive-function- calling, Hermes), demonstrating understanding of and adherence to the constraints. Opus 4.6 analyzed specific BFCL evaluation failures by sample number, then gen- erated targeted training data addressing those exact fail- ure patterns. Kimi K2.5 read HealthBench evaluation files to extract theme distributions and rubric criteria, then crafted training data tailored to match. , 2025) reveal sub- stantial disagreement on automation timelines and iden- tify compute bottlenecks as primary constraints. POSTTRAINBENCH differs from those approaches, because it uses larger models (up to 4B parameters) and allows agents complete freedom in their approach, both algorithmic and regarding the data which they use (subject to contamination constraints). POST- TRAINBENCH differs by evaluating the automation of post- training, which allows us to move to more realistic settings with larger LLMs (up to 4B parameters), gives more free- dom (e.g. First, the gap between agent perfor- mance (23.2%) and instruction-tuned baselines (51.1%) suggests that full automation of post-training remains out of reach for now , but the rapid improvement across model generations—from 9.9% for Sonnet 4.5 to 23.2% for Opus 4.6 within roughly six months—implies this gap may close faster than expected. agents trained on test data, substituted pre-trained models,