REAL METHOD of "Safe Reinforcement Learning with Preference-based Constraint Inference" (arXiv 2603.23565v2). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

To address the above knowledge gaps, we propose a novel ap- proach namely Preference-based Constrained Re- inforcement Learning (PbCRL). We introduce a novel dead zone mechanism into preference mod- eling and theoretically prove that it encourages heavy-tailed cost distributions, thereby achieving better constraint alignment. Further, two- stage training strategy is deployed to lower online labeling burdens while adaptively enhancing con- straint satisfaction. Typically formulated as a Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman, 2021), Safe RL aims to maximize reward while meeting safety constraints, often expressed as bounds on the expectation of cumulative cost. Apart from those explicit constraints such as univariate bounds, there is a large family of implicit constraints in the real world that could be highly complicated, trajectory- based, and perhaps seldom well-specified. These methods typically rely on extensive expert demonstrations to infer the underlying constraints. First, there is a critical misalignment between the ranking objective of BT models and the distributional re- quirements of Safe RL. Since Safe RL relies on the expected cumulative cost to formulate constraints (Altman, 2021), two different cost distributions with identical rankings may lead to different expectation values, as well as distinct constraint satisfaction outcomes. To address the above issues, we propose a novel Safe RL approach with preference-based constraint inference, namely Preference-based Constrained Reinforcement Learn- ing (PbCRL). We theoretically prove that the dead zone encourages heavy-tailed cost distributions, which mitigates the constraint underestimation (unsafe and dangerous) with better constraint alignment. We establish a two-stage training strategy to lower the burden of online labeling and help improve constraint satisfaction. Given an initial state s0, the cumulative reward is defined as 2 Safe Reinforcement Learning with Preference-based Constraint Inference R(s0, π) =P∞ t=0 γtr(st, at), and the cumulative cost as C(s 0, π) =P∞ t=0 γtc(st, at). The threshold is assigned to be 0 without loss of generality. To address the issues identified in Section 1, we propose a composite loss function for Preference-based Constrained Inference (PbCI): 4,LDZ saf eis the dead-zone augmented safety loss (detailed in Section 3), and LSN Ris the SNR loss (introduced in Section 4). However, such perfect ranking and classification of trajec- tory costs may not guarantee that the learned constraint is aligned with the true underlying constraint. Since the constraint is modeled in the ex- pectation form E[C]≤d , this underestimation may further loosen the safety constraint and eventually fail to guide the policy learning for true safety requirements. Lemma 3.1 proves the gradient advantage of the dead-zone loss, which Theorem 3.2 propagates into multi-step dominance. Building on the gradient difference in Lemma 3.1, we ana- lyze the cumulative effect of multistep gradient descent over the training process of the cost model. Theorem 3.2.For any unsafe trajectory τ, ˆC DZ t (τ) and ˆCt(τ) are the cost learned by the dead zone loss LDZ saf e and the original loss Lsaf eat training step t, respectively. Corollary 3.3.The cost distribution learned by the dead zone loss LDZ saf ehas a strictly heavier right tail than that learned by the original loss Lsaf e. Loss Design based on Signal-to-Noise Ratio The dead zone mechanism from Section 3 is primarily de- signed to align the constraint with the true underlying con- straint. 9, the overall loss function for preference-based constrained inference LP bCIis defined in Eq. The overall loss function is optimized to learn a 4 Safe Reinforcement Learning with Preference-based Constraint Inference cost function ˆc(s, a)that not only aligns well with the true underlying constraint but also provides informative signals for efficient policy optimization. Two-stage Training Strategy This section will propose a two-stage training strategy for the cost model, and then present the overall Preference- based Constrained Reinforcement Learning (PbCRL) algo- rithm and its theoretical convergence guarantee. Constraint Learning Details Most preference-based RL methods jointly optimize the cost model and the policy online (Reddy Chirra et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2021; Christiano et al., 2017). This approach leverages offline data for initial cost model training, followed by online finetuning during policy opti- mization, thereby lowering the burden of online labeling and enhancing constraint satisfaction. Offline Pre-trainingStandard online approaches require annotators to continuously provide feedback throughout the entire policy training procedure, resulting in a significant labeling burden that is often expensive and time-consuming. The cost model cψ(s, a), parameterized by ψ, is trained by the loss in Eq. The adaptive finetuning of the cost model during policy train- ing allows it to align the pre-trained cost function with the genuine safety requirements encountered in the train- ing environment, thereby adaptively enhancing constraint satisfaction of the learned policy. Preference-based Constrained Reinforcement Learning (PbCRL) Based on these, we present the proposed algorithm, namely Preference-based Constrained Reinforcement Learning (PbCRL). Additionally, they satisfy timescale 5 Safe Reinforcement Learning with Preference-based Constraint Inference Algorithm 1Preference-based Constrained Reinforcement Learning (PbCRL) Require:Preference datasetD, finetune intervalK, 1:Cost Model Pre-training: Existing methods can be broadly categorized into primal-dual methods (Ray et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020) and projection-based methods (Achiam et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020). Projection-based methods, such as CPO (Achiam et al., 2017) and PCPO (Yang et al., 2020), project the policy gradient onto a feasible set to ensure constraint satisfaction at each update step. Constraint Inference/LearningTo bypass manual constraint specification with dedicated system engineering, a growing body of work focuses on learning safety constraints from data. PbCRL requires approximately 5 hours for each individual run (1.5 hours for offline cost pre-training and 3.5 hours for online fine-tuning and policy training), whereas other fully online baselines require approximately 6 hours. Training Details This section provides detailed procedures for training the proposed PbCRL algori