REAL METHOD of "How to Train Your Advisor: Steering Black-Box LLMs with Advisor Models" (arXiv 2510.02453v3). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

We introduce ADVISORMODELS, a method to train small open-weight models to generate dy- namic, per-instance natural language advice that improves the capabilities of black-box frontier models. Our method shows how to perform parametric optimization for black-box frontier models in a practical and cost-effective way. We introduceADVISORMODELS(Figure 1), a method for training a lightweight model to reactively steer a black-box model by generating dynamic input-specific advice. advisors trained with a low- cost student model would still transfer improvements to a frontier student model, resulting in low overall training cost. We introduceADVISORMODELS, a novel method for dynamically steering frozen, black-box models using trainable policies. Trained Prompt Generators.A number of related works do train a lightweight model to modify the prompt to a black-box model. Black-Box Prompt Optimization (Cheng et al., 2024) uses training data from an expert that modifies prompts to align with preference labels to train a prompt rewriter. ADVISORMODELS We introduce ADVISORMODELS, a method to train a lightweight policy to steer black-box foundation models through natural language. For example, building off the 2-step pipeline in Figure 1, we implement a 3-step variant of ADVISORMODELS. Under this variant, the advisor is given an initial attempt by the student (step 1) to generate its advice (step 2), which the student uses to generate a final revised response (step 3). Advice after Training First, inspect the statistics property implementation. Advisor Models Training Transfer to Frontier Figure 2.Example of ADVISORMODELStraining and transfer for multi-turn tasks.The input task is given first to the advisor model to generate turn 1 advice. The student can return after every action, or at regular intervals to save cost (i.e., a single step from the advisor’s perspective consists of multiple student actions). Inte- grating ADVISORMODELSinto any RL training framework or algorithm is as simple as modifying a step in the environ- ment to make a generation call to the black-box model with the advisor’s output (policy’s action) before evaluating the reward on the final student output. Before training, the advisor gives vague high-level advice, but after training the advice becomes clear and actionable. This produces a robust system that we em- pirically show improves black-box capabilities while preserving capabilities on untrained tasks, avoiding post-training risks such as catastrophic forgetting. Due to the complexity of the task, we use the Level 0 (easiest) subset and the 3-step ADVISORMODELSarchitecture. While standard SWE agent training focuses on accuracy, an underexplored and less saturated aspect of agent training is the efficiency with which it is able to solve tasks (# of interactions with the envi- ronment). Leveraging ideas from the cur- riculum learning literature (Narvekar et al., 2020; Bae et al., 2026), we filter the train split to remove difficult problems outside of the student model’s capabilities, leaving a high learning signal train set of 56. We design a reward function accounting for both correctness and efficiency, and train with the multi-turn architecture injecting advisor genera- tions every 5 student steps. We sample 200 training and 50 test examples and train with the 2-step architecture. To measure improvement, we compare the performance of our ADVISORMODELS-trained pipelines to the pipeline before training (i.e., untrained advisor) and the student on its own. The GEPA baseline was not run for SWE Agent Efficiency as the method is not optimized for multi-turn tasks and there’s a high cost associated with training on the domain. RESULTS The performance of our trained ADVISORMODELS pipelines (i.e., with the student models used during training) is shown in Figure 3. In contrast, an untrained efficiency-aware advisor significantly improved the efficiency (13.7 steps), but at a significant cost to resolve rate (52.6%). However, after training, the full ADVISORMODELSpipeline maintained the original resolve rate (61.2%) while retaining the significant efficiency gains (14.4 steps). On the other hand, the trained advisor overcomes the loss and improves upon the standalone baseline, achieving an accuracy of 76.8%. On SWE Agent Efficiency, the trained advisor with the original student (Gemini 2.5 Flash) sped up trajectories by 4.7 fewer average steps without affecting resolve rate. When replacing the student with the frontier Gemini 3 Pro, the trained advisor similarly sped up trajectories by 5.4 fewer average steps without affecting resolve rate. We emphasize that the frontier model improvements were achieved by transferring advisors trained using alow-cost student to demonstrate the practicality of our method. All preference domains use the 2-step architecture mentioned in Section 3. Qwen 2.5 7B MTOB 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Steps 31.7 26.3 Figure 4.ADVISORMODELSimproves frontier model capabili- ties.Advisor models trained using low-cost students can be used to improve the performance of frontier models. Qwen 2.5 7B Review Level Student Advisor Models 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Eval Reward 0.508 0.851 Math Solutions Figure 6.ADVISORMODELStrained on personalization trans- fer to frontier models.Advisor models trained using low-cost students can be used to personalize frontier models. This in- dicates that ADVISORMODELStraining does not affect performance on un-optimized objectives, even when there is strong contextual overlap (as is the case for Math So- lutions and accuracy on MATH-500). To investigate, we conduct a training run where Qwen2.5 3B Instruct advises Qwen2.5 7B Instruct on the MTOB domain and compare against directly training Qwen2.5 7B Instruct. We train both methods using the hyperparameters described in Appendix 1 for 20 epochs, matching the setup used in Section 4.1. Conclusion & Future Work We introduced ADVISORMODELS, a method for steering black-box foundation models through learned dynamic ad- vice. Our method provides a practi- cal, cost-effective solution that achieves specialization while maintaining robustness. Training Details We utilize a lightly modified fork of the SkyRL framework for all of our RL training runs (Griggs et al., 2025). HYPERPARAMETER VALUESWE AGENTEFFICIENCYVALUE TRAIN BATCH SIZE 16 8 POLICY MINI-BATCH SIZE 4 4 MICRO-BATCH SIZE(PERGPU) 2 1 LEARNING RATE 1.0×10 −6 1.0×10 −6 MAX PROMPT LENGTH 8192 28672 MAX GENERATION LENGTH 16384 4096 TEMPE