REAL METHOD of "Structured 4D Latent Predictive Model for Robot Planning" (arXiv 2607.01166v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

However, progress is constrained by the scarcity of large-scale, task-diverse, and interactive robotic data re- quired to train such agents. This detailed 3D information is then leveraged by a goal- conditioned inverse dynamics module, which translates the generated futures into precise robot actions and is especially effective for fine-grained, 3D-aware tasks. ii) We propose a planning framework that leverages our model’s detailed 3D predictions as geometrically rich goals for an inverse dynamics module, enabling precise and spatially-aware manipulation. iii) Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms strong video generative planning baselines in both gen- eration quality and downstream robotic task perfor- mance, including strong zero-shot generalization to various visual changes, and effectiveness on real-world robot tasks. In contrast, our method models dynamics directly in a structured 3D 2 Structured 4D Latent Predictive Model for Robot Planning latent space, enabling consistent multi-view rollouts and geometrically grounded subgoals. A straightforward extension to 3D is to train separate predictive models for each viewpoint and then fuse their outputs. We first unproject the depth map using camera geometry and merge them into a 3D point cloud, which is then voxelized into a sparse grid {pi}L i=1 . For each image, we use a pre-trained DINOv2 encoder to extract patch-level embeddings. DINOv2 patch embeddings are unprojected into the voxel grid using the same camera poses, and the features arriving at the same voxel are averaged, then a latent encoder E to produce the latent features fi. We use the pre-trained 3D encoder E and decoder D from TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025), which was trained using RGB reconstruction losses (L1, D-SSIM, LPIPS) to super- vise the 3D Gaussians. This encoder-decoder architecture bridges raw visual perception (2D images) and a structured internal 3D scene state ( zt). At each t, multi-view images are processed by a pre-trained encoder (Xiang et al., 2025) to obtain a 3D latentzt. The voxel grid {0,1} N 3 is first encoded by 3D convolutional blocks and compressed into a latent tensor RN 3 c with lower resolution (Nc < N). • Conditioning.Text instructions are encoded with a pre- trained CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021). Training Objectives.The Single Dynamics model (SD) and Latent Generator (LG) are trained independently as condi- tional flow-matching models in latent space. Concretely, for each component we optimize a conditional flow-matching objective of the form as follows: We first decode Algorithm 1Structured 4D Latent Predictive Model for Robot Planning 1:Observe initial multi-view images{o (i) 0 }. At each step, a goal-conditioned inverse dynamics module translates the current latent state and the next subgoal (zt, zt+1) into a short-horizon action chunk, which is executed on the robot. We first describe the experimental setup, then report 4D generation results that assess visual quality and 3D consistency, followed by downstream robot planning 5 Structured 4D Latent Predictive Model for Robot Planning Table 1.Evaluation of 4D generation quality.We collect 5 key frames per trajectory and 40 camera views per frame. Our method improves 3D consistency and mask accuracy over Wan-2.1, TesserAct, and OpenSora-1.3, benefiting from an explicit 3D latent representation. Inverse Dynamics for Robot Planning.To translate model predicted subgoals into executable actions, we train an in- verse dynamics module (Sec. DP and DP3 are trained from expert demonstrations for each task. A common strategy for these models is to generate independent videos for each viewpoint and then attempt to fuse them at each timestep. Table 1a shows that our method significantly outperforms fine-tuned Wan 2.1, TesserAct, and OpenSora 1.3 for multiview consistency. For each subfigure, the first two rows show renderings from different camera viewpoints, and the third row shows corresponding point cloud visualizations. We com- pare our method’s manipulation performance against video- generative planning baselines UniPi and TesserAct, and imitation learning policies DP and DP3. Table 2 shows that our method significantly outperforms the video-based predictive models and achieves performance comparable to 7 Structured 4D Latent Predictive Model for Robot Planning Table 4.Zero-shot generalization with visual and viewpoint changes.Success rates on the StackCube-v1 task under unseen test-time conditions. Our method preserves consistent 3D structure and object placement from the unseen viewpoint. We evaluated our method on three RLBench tasks:CloseBox,SweepTo- Dustpan, andWaterPlants, collecting 1,000 demonstrations for each. We utilized 20 cameras for model training and 4 cameras for inference, maintaining the same 4D predictive model and inverse dynamics architecture above. The results in Table 4 show that our method maintains a high success rate across these vi- sual changes, demonstrating strong zero-shot generalization ability. Ablation Study Inputs to the Inverse Dynamics Module.We ablate the in- put representation for inverse dynamics module, comparing decoded point clouds (ours), 3D latents, and 3D voxels. Due to the high computational cost for 3D latents encoding with large number of camera views, here we use 4 cameras for inverse dynamics module training. We sampled four intermediate frames from each trajectory and processed them into a training dataset following the data preparation procedure in Section 4.1. Figure 5 (g) shows that our method achieves a higher success rate than the baseline, demonstrating that our proposed approach is effective for real-world robotic manipulation. Ours- K denotes a predictive model trained with K camera views; all methods use 4 cameras at inference time. Structured 4D Latent Predictive Model Training Our framework consists of two main components: The dynamics model is also conditioned on the input 3D latent; we use sparse 3D convolutional layers to match the latent’s resolution to the model’s internal dimension, after which it is injected into the cross-attention blocks together with the text condition. Training for both models spanned 300,000 steps with a learning rate of 1×10 −4. For the latent generator, we applied 4 gradient accumulation steps, and for the dynamics model, we used 2 steps. Inverse Dynamics Model Training Our goal-conditioned inverse dynamics model is trained on 1,000 expert demonstrations for each task. Training f