REAL METHOD of "RDT2: Exploring the Scaling Limit of UMI Data Towards Zero-Shot Cross-Embodiment Generalization" (arXiv 2602.03310v1). Extracted method-dense text follows; base the explainer on THIS actual approach, not the abstract.

Our approach em- ploys a novel three-stage training recipe that aligns discrete linguistic knowledge with contin- uous control via Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ), flow-matching, and distillation for real- time inference. Alternative methods using diffusion models (Chen et al., 2022; Chi et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024; Black et al., 2024) suffer from slow con- vergence (Pertsch et al., 2025) and a fundamental mismatch between their continuous probability distributions and the discrete counterparts of knowledge in pre-trained Vision- Language Models (VLMs). To address the aforementioned challenges, we introduce RDT2, one of the first robotic foundation models for zero- shot deployment on novel embodiments, which can handle open-vocabulary tasks. RDT2 is built upon a 7B pretrained VLM, Qwen2.5-VL (Bai et al., 2025), with specialized action heads and three-stage training strategies for learn- ing from large-scale robotic data. For fast convergence, in Stage 1, we encode the continuous robot actions into dis- crete tokens with Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022) and then train the VLM by minimizing the cross-entropy loss. In Stage 2, for expressiveness and efficiency, we employ an ac- tion expert to model continuous probability and train it with the flow-matching loss. In Stage 3, we propose a simple yet effective distillation loss and distill the action expert into a single-step generator, achieving ultra-fast inference speed. Based on the above methods, we were able to train our model, RDT2, on one of the largest open-source UMI datasets, comprising over 10,000 hours of human demon- strations. Because UMI provides an embodiment-agnostic physical interface, cou- pled with large-scale pretraining, RDT2 became one of the first models to achieve combined generalization of the four factors for open-vocabulary tasks. Discrete methods align naturally with the probabilistic outputs of the pretrained VLM, but they suffer from quanti- zation errors and the inefficiency of autoregressive sampling. Model and Training Pipeline We introduce RDT2, a VLA model trained through a three- stage pipeline as shown in Fig. 5.1), we discretize the continuous action space into tokens using RVQ and train the VLM backbone via a standard cross- entropy loss. 5.2), we freeze the VLM backbone and train a diffusion-based action ex- pert, leveraging a flow-matching loss to generate continuous actions. 5.3) involves distilling the multi-step action expert into an efficient, single-step generator, thereby enabling rapid inference for our large-scale VLA model. To mitigate these problems, we opt to first pretrain the VLM backbone using a cross-entropy loss be- fore diffusion training, which is consistent with its original training objective. This helps us effectively preserve the model’s valuable pretrained knowledge, which additionally benefits from our add-ons of vision-language data during training. 6, our experiments confirm that this discretized pretraining phase significantly acceler- ates the convergence of the VLA model compared to train- ing directly with the diffusion loss from the outset. Specifically, we first encode the continuous action chunk At ∈R Ta×d with a 1D temproal convolutional nerual networks (CNNs) ϕenc into n latents of C dimensions, denoted by {zi ∈R C}n i=1 =ϕ enc(At). We mini- mize the following loss to train the tokenizer: Then, in Stage 2, we train a small diffusion action expert to generate continuous actions efficiently. For highly dynamic tasks, we introduce a third stage that distills the diffusion policy into a one-step generator, thereby enabling extremely rapid inference speed. The VLA model was trained for 128K iterations on a composite dataset of our UMI dataset and a small subset of vision- language data, using a next-token prediction objective. Stage 2 To enhance inference efficiency beyond that of autoregres- sive models, we introduce a second stage of training. In this stage, we freeze the pretrained VLA backbone from Stage 1 and train a dedicated action expert. Specifically, the action expert leverages cross-attention to incorporate the latent features from each layer of the VLA backbone. Flow-Matching Training.The action expert is supervised by a flow-matching loss (Lipman et al., 2022): Lexpert(θ) :=E{ℓ,ot,At}∼D,τ∼U(0,1) h ∥ vθ(τ,A τ t ,VLA(ℓ,o t))−u(A τ t |A t)∥2 2 i , (3) where τ is the flow-matching time step, vθ(·) is the denois- ing network with trainable parameters θ, and VLA(·) is the frozen VLA backbone. In practice, we set the step size τ= 0.2, corresponding to 5 integration steps. In our experiment, we randomly initialized the action expert and trained it for 66K iterations on our UMI dataset, with the VLA backbone (trained in Stage 1) frozen. To overcome this lim- itation, we employ diffusion distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Chen et al., 2023) to convert the expert policy trained in Stage 2 into a single-step generator. Diffusion Distillation.For highly dynamic tasks, we dis- till the action expert into a single-step generator with param- etersθ ′ using the following regression objective: It is noted that θ has been pre- trained in Stage 2 and stays frozen in this stage, VLA(·) is also frozen, and θ′ is trainable, initialized from θ. Un- like previous distillation practices, F(·) is computed on- the-fly during training, rather than pre-generated during data preparation. To ensure the rigor of the experiment, firstly, we selected three scenes that had never appeared in the training set for testing. Training loss as a function of consumed tokens (non-repeating) under various model parameter scales. Training loss as a function of total model parameters under different amounts of training data (measured by tokens). We evaluated the training loss at multiple intermediate checkpoints through- out this single epoch. Since each data token was consumed only once, the training loss could indicate the model’s gen- eralizability on unseen samples. Consequently, we could plot the training loss as a function of both model size (N) and tokens consumed (D), isolating their effects on performance. 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Training ZFLOPs 10 2 10 1 Diffusion Loss (MSE) Diffusion (Scratch) Diffusion (Stage 2) AR (Stage 1) 101 AR Loss (Cross Entropy) Figure 6: Training Configuration.We use a Logistic Normal distribution (µ= 0, σ= 1)to sample timesteps t during training, rather than a uniform distribution. Model and